
===PAGE 1===
Container Vessel
Stowage Planning

Rune Mallar Jensen | Dario Pacino | MaiLise Ajspur | Claus Vesterdal

Weilbach’

===PAGE 2===
© Weilbach A/S

weilbach.com

1st Edition 2018

ISBN 978-87-7790-311-3
Layout: Weilbach / Antracit.dk

Cover artwork: Ginter Block
Title: 20-07 Collage Maersk Antares
www.guenterblockfotografie.de

DEN DANSKE

MARITIME FOND /

This book is financially supported by the
Danish Maritime Fund, grant no. 2012-49.

The Danish Maritime Fund provides financial
support to initiatives and undertakings, which
may serve to develop and promote Danish
shipping- and shipbuilding industries.

===PAGE 3===
ie

Container Vessel Stowage x

Bi

jal” , Waid Soe :| Planning
. “x, Edition 1
Container Vessel “ Author Rune Maller Jensen, Dario Pacino, Mi
Stowage Planning Publisher Weilbach

Product Code WEI3480A
Languages English
Shop Link View in Web Shop

Container Vessel Stowage Planning is the first
complete textbook on stowage planning including
containers, vessels, terminals, forecasts, the planning
process, software tools, and automation research. It
teaches you how to make winning stowage plans in
a competitive market. The book is ideal for
education of stowage planners, and it is a valuable
reference for decision makers in higher business
functions such as uptake, capacity, network, and
fleet management. Authors: Rune Moller Jensen,
Dario Pacino, Mai Lise Ajspur, Claus Vesterdal.

LL) Open


===PAGE 4===
Preface

Every time a container vessel calls a port, a stowage planner has spent
several hours deciding where the containers to load in the port should be
placed on the vessel. Stowage planning is fascinating. Modern container
vessels are among the largest ships in the world and often a major fraction of
the cargo must be discharged or loaded in a port.

As a combinatorial optimization problem, stowage planning is extremely hard
with an unusually wide range of constraints and objectives including stacking
rules, vessel physics, cargo uncertainty, terminal operations, vessel
utilization, and fuel cost minimization. Stowage planning requires experienced
and creative planners to be solved with sufficient quality within the limited
time available.

The high business value of stowage know-how is another surprising aspect. It
is not only applied in the daily operation of stowing cargo. It is also used for
revenue management to control the sale of cargo bookings and capacity
management of the network. It is even relevant for strategic decisions like
deploying vessels to services, designing new vessels, and planning new
service networks. In fact, stowage know-how is a core asset of liner shipping
companies and has positive impact on the world economy by securing
low-cost transportation of goods.

Optimization problems with such an importance normally have well
established scientific communities with thousands of publications and a
strong ecosystem of vendors of software support tools. But this is not the
case for stowage planning. There is not a single textbook on the topic and the
internet is of little use to learn about it. The number of active research groups,
PhDs, and patents can be counted on one hand, and since the beginning of
container shipping in the late 1950s, less than 200 scientific papers on
stowage planning have been published. Commercial software tools exist, but
they provide limited support for optimizing stowage plans. It is in large still a
problem that is solved manually by stowage planners. Stowage planning

===PAGE 5===
Preface

remains an experience profession after more than five decades of practice. It
is taught in an apprenticeship fashion internally by the liner shipping
companies and as a result, it is hard to access for the general public.

The purpose of this book is to change this state-of-affairs. It is to our
knowledge the first textbook providing a complete description of container
vessel stowage planning. It is our intention that it can be used to train new
stowage planners and serve as a standard reference in the shipping industry.
We further hope that it can stimulate research on stowage planning by
providing an accessible description of the problem as well as previous work on
the problem.

The book primarily describes container vessel stowage planning in liner
shipping. It does not cover containerized tramp shipping and roll-on roll-off
(ro-ro) container shipping. The book is self-contained with no assumption of
prior knowledge about the liner shipping domain. Hydrostatic concepts are
explained assuming only high school mathematics and physics.

The book consists of the following chapters:

Chapter 1 Introduction. This chapter gives a brief introduction to container
vessel stowage and the container revolution. It then gives an overview of
strategic and tactical decisions in liner shipping companies and describes the
central role of stowage expertise in most of these decisions.

Chapter 2 Containers. This chapter describes the container types that can
be carried by modern container vessels. The description focuses on their
dimensions and other physical attributes that dictate how they can be stowed.

Chapter 3 Vessels. This chapter provides a detailed description of cellular
container vessels and gives an overview of the different classes that are active
in the current world fleet. It then defines all vessel related stowage
constraints (e.g., due to physical structure and seaworthiness requirements)
and objectives (e.g., to achieve optimal trim and maximum volume utilization).

===PAGE 6===
Preface

Chapter 4 Cargo Forecasts. This chapter briefly introduces the challenge
of cargo volatility and describes a number of best practices in stowage
planning to deal with the issue.

Chapter 5 Container Terminals. This chapter first gives a general overview
of terminal operations. It then describes quay crane operations and describes
best practices for achieving stowage plans with high terminal productivity.

Chapter 6 Stowage Planning Process. This chapter describes the complete
stowage planning process. It includes an overview of the main business
objectives, available software tools, and shows examples of classical manual
stowage planning and modern semi-automatic planning.

Chapter 7 Auto-Planning Research. This chapter gives an overview of
scientific work on stowage planning optimization. It then describes the
complete mathematical optimization model of a recent approach.

Chapter 8 Outlook. This chapter takes a look into the future of stowage
planning and the application of decision support tools in the liner shipping
industry in general.

Rune Moller Jensen is an associate professor at the IT University of
Copenhagen, where he has headed multiple research projects on stowage
planning. He is founder of Optivation that since 2007 has developed stowage
planning optimization algorithms. Dario Pacino is an associate professor at the
Technical University of Denmark, where his research includes stowage
planning and terminal operations. Mai Lise Ajspur is a PostDoc at the IT
University of Copenhagen, where she investigates the application of stowage
planning optimization models in capacity management. Finally, Claus is
Master Mariner and holds a Masters exam from Svendborg International
Maritime Academy. He has worked 8 years in container stowage departments
in Denmark and Singapore for Maersk Line and Seago Line.

Many colleagues have contributed to the research and projects over the years
that have made this book possible. We would like to use this opportunity to
thank Agnieszka Sivertsen, Alberto Delgado, Aleksandra Korach, Alexander

===PAGE 7===
Preface

Gray, Andre Nielsen, Andrea Jensen, Andreas Hollmann, Antti Kaunonen,
Arthur Touzot, Benoit De La Tour, Benoit Paquin, Berit Dangaard Brouer, Brian
Kallehauge, Carsten Melchiors, Christian Schulte, David Pisinger, Denis Le
Goff, Der Horng Lee, Esben Mose Hansen, Eric Nercam, Guy Rey-Herme,
Henrik Reif Andersen, Henrik Lunde Jorgensen, Henrik Olesen, Igor Protsenko,
Jan Voetmann, Jean Charles Potigny, Jeff Schneider, Jens Sondergaard, Jes
Regner, Joel Andres Granados, Jorge Diaz Lores, Jorn Springer, Jorgen Haahr,
Jorgen Staunstrup, Kai Rostrup Jensen, Kasper Mahon Andreasen, Kent
Andersen, Kevin Tierney, Kian Hao Tan, Kim Hansen, Laurent Flindt Muller, Line
Reinhardt, Louis Destelle, Mark Cromme, Martin Kjaer Svendsen, Mads Kehlet
Jepsen, Mads Tofte, Michael Bergen, Michael Haddon Holst, Michael Klemm,
Mika Yasuoka, Mikkel Mihldorff Sigurd, Moemen Said, Mun Keong Li, Nicolas
Guilbert, Nikolaos Palaiologos Foskolos, Niels Christensen, Nobert Kuzniar,
Oliver Rustler, Oliver Schade, Oscar Pernia Fernandez, Peter Oppen Franck,
Peter Sestoft, Pierre Laurent Dupoy, Rainer Hartmann, Raj Gupta, Robert
Gartner, Robert Inchausti, Robert Milton, Richard Holgate, Sascha Pfaller,
Sathia Moorthy Subbarayan, Sebastian Zurheide, Scott Holland, Scott
Peoples, Stephanie Hu, Thomas Bebbington, Thomas Stidsen, Torben Mons,
Wai Ling Hoi, Wei Jie Tan, and Yusuke Kanzaki.

This book has been financially supported by the Danish Maritime Fund,
grant no. 2012-49 and the IT University of Copenhagen.

Copenhagen 5 April 2018
Rune Moller Jensen, Dario Pacino, Mai Lise Ajspur, and Claus Vesterdal.

===PAGE 8===
Contents

Contents

Preface
Acronyms

Chapter 1

Introduction
1.1. The Container Revolution

1.1.1. The Infrastructure of Containerization...............

1.2 Liner Shipping Business . . .
1.2.1. Network Design .........-.--..---2--2--2005-

2.1.2 Structure and Strength............-......-.---

1.1.2 A Continuously Growing Business

1.2.2 Fleet Management..............--222220200-- 24
1.2.3 DailyOperation................22.222220000-- 25
1.2.4 InternalCommunication ..........-...-.-.--.--5- 30
Chapter 2
Containers
2.1. The ISO Container
2.1.1 PhysicalDimensions...............-.--+22220--

2.2 ContainerTypes.........2..... 200000202
2.2.1. Standard (DC) and High-Cube (HC) Containers . .
2.2.2 Open Top (OT) and Open Side Containers .............
2.2.3 FlatRackContainers ..........-...-..--2------
2.2.4 Artificial Tween Deck (ATD).................-----
2.2.5 Out Of Gauge Containers (OOG) ............-.....-
2.2.6 Break Bulk Cargo(BB).........-....-..---2---20--
2.2.7 Reefer Containers (RF)
2.2.8 Insulated Containers .............--2.--2-220--
2.2.9 Heated Containers...............--2--2-022-0--
2.210 TankContainers(TK) ...............-.222--2005
2.2.11. Dry BulkContainers...............---2222200-
2.2.12 Pallet Wide Containers
2.2.13 Empty Containers ..............22-0--2222000-
2.214 Dangerous Good Containers(DG).................-
2.3 ISO Container Identifiers............-..--.2-.---2205-


===PAGE 9===
Contents

Chapter 3

Vessels

3.1 VesselEvolution............ 2.200202 eee eee eee 51

3.2 VesselDesign .... 2... 2... eee ee eee eee 53

3.3 Seaworthiness Requirements. ................--+-2-205- 58
3.3.1 Transversal Stability... .............--..2.2.22--- 61
3.3.2 Stress Forces. . - 62
3.3.3 LineofSight...............22 2502 e eee ee eens 66

3.4 SlotPlanning...............2 2220022 68
3.4.1 BelowDeck........... 2.222 e eee eee eee eee 68
3.4.2 On Deck 76
3.4.3 Dangerous Goods (DG)................220-020002 92
3.4.4 Handling Instructions (HIs)..............2.--2.--- 98

Chapter 4

Cargo Forecasts

4.1 Cargo Forecasting
4.1.1 Forecast Formats

4.1.2 Forecast Factors.....
4.1.3 Cargo Forecasting Methods

we eee eee 111

4.2 Best Practices for Cargo Uncertainty .................... 113
4.2.1 Stowage Planning Example...........-......2.--- 114
4.2.2 Stowin Vertical Patterns...............--2--20-- 134

4.2.3 Use Paired Block Stowage ..............-.--0--- 135
4.2.4 Avoid Hydrostatic Extremes... .......--........-- 137
4.2.5 Even Out 20’ ContainersinWings.................-- 137
4.2.6 Use Layout Patterns that Fits Certainty.............. 138

4.2.7 Use Stowage Templates.............--.-2-22----- 141

===PAGE 10===
Contents

Chapter 5

Container Terminals

5.1 Terminal Layout and Equipment -144
5.11 Layout................2.02 0200000022 145
5.1.2 Equipment............-.-.2.2 220022 e eee eee eee 146

5.2 TerminalWork Processes ..........---2-20020020 eee 153

5.3 Terminal Efficient Stowage Plans ... . -154
5.3.1 Optimize Crane Move Cycles.............-..----- 155
5.3.2 Minimize Idle Time of Cranes... .....-.-.-.--2-2-4- 161

Chapter 6

Stowage Planning Process

6.1 Work Flow Overview... ......-..-2 222 eee eee ee eee eee 173

6.2 The Planning Challenge..............-.--222220000-- 176

6.3 Software Tools... ...... 22.20 eee ee ee eee eee 177
6.3.1 ManualPlanning.................-.---2222005 179
6.3.2 Semi-Automated Planning.................-.-+-- 182
6.3.3 Software Vendors ............--.--22-22000e 186

6.4 Key Performance Indicators...............-.2.2222000-- 187
6.4.1 Financial Criteria.... 2.2.2.2... .. 22-2222 eee eee 189
6.4.2 SuezTiers..... 2.22.20 222 ee eee 192
6.4.3 Safety Criteria -193
6.4.4 Stability...........2..2. 220.222.220.020 2020000-
6.4.5 Efficiency

6.5 CaseStudy.......... 2.0.22
6.5.1 Setup.....

6.5.2 Service Case
6.5.3 Port 1: Felixstowe
6.5.4 Port 2: Rotterdam

6.5.5 Port3: Hamburg... . -206
6.5.6 Port4:Zeebrugge ........-..-.22220---222 22 ee 210
6.5.7. Port5: Rotterdam ...............-02202020000 ee 214
6.5.8 Conclusion .........-... 022. e eee eee eee 218

===PAGE 11===
Contents

Chapter 7

Auto-Planning Research

7.1 Literature Survey ..........
7.2 SolutionApproach..........

7.2.1 Multi-Port Master Planning

7.2.2 Slot Planning........
7.3. Computational Results. ......
7.3.1 Slot Planning Experiments

7.4 Extensions for Industrial Application

Chapter 8
Outlook

8.1 The Future of Stowage Planning Software

8.2 Uptake and Capacity Management

Bibliography

10

===PAGE 12===
Acronyms

Acronyms

AGV Automatic Guided Vehicle. LOS Line Of Sight.

Al Artificial Intelligence LP Linear Programming.

ATD Artificial Tween Deck. LS Local Search.

B&B ~—_ Branch-and-Bound. MIP Mixed-Integer Programming.

BB Break-Bulk. ML Machine Learning

BM Bending Moment. MPH Moves Per Hour.

CBLS_ Constraint-Based Local OOG  Out-Of-Gauge (oversized)
Search. container.

cl Crane Intensity. oT Open Top container.

COD Change Of Destination. POD Port Of Discharge.

cP Constraint Programming. POL Port Of Load.

cs Crane Split. PSW Permissible Stack Weight.

CSM Cargo Securing Manual. RF ReeFer container.

DC Dry Cargo (normal height) RMG __ Rail Mounted Gantry crane.
container. ROB Remain On Board cargo.

DG Dangerous Goods container. RTG Rubber Tier Gantry crane.

DOC Document Of Compliance. sc Straddle Carrier.

ETA Estimated Time of Arrival. SF Shear Force.

ETD Estimated Time of Departure. TK Tank container.

FEU Forty-foot Equivalent Unit. TEU Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit.

FP Flash Point ™ Torsion Moment.

FSM Free Surface Moment. ULCV Ultra Large Container Vessel.

GA General Arrangement.

GM Metacentric height.

GMPH Gross Moves Per Hour.

HC High-Cube container.

HI Handling Instruction.

HR High-cube Reefer container.

IMO International Maritime
Organisation

IP Integer Programming.

KPI Key Performance Indicator.

11

===PAGE 13===
12

===PAGE 14===
Chapter1 | Introduction

CHAPTER 1

Introduction

Container shipping is for cargo what the Internet is for data: it provides
largescale global transfer that is fast, cheap, and reliable. The immense
impact of the Internet is known by all, but few are aware of the impact of
container shipping. People do not deal with container vessels in their daily
lives, and liner shipping companies and terminals are unknown territory for
most.

The truth is that container shipping is an enabler of the global trade that we
take for granted today [9]. In fact, it is believed to have been more important
for globalization than freer markets [22]. We depend on it when shopping
cheap electronics, furnitures, and fresh fruit from all over the world. Today,
globally distributed supply chains are serviced by container vessels.
Containerization has helped the world economy boom and pull millions if not
billions out of poverty in just a few decades. It is even a sustainable
technology with container vessels emitting far less CO, per cargo ton
kilometre than any other mode of transportation.

The cost efficiency of container shipping is reflected in the design of container
vessels. Their aesthetics is not in their physical appearance but the fact that
they have been engineered with the sole purpose of efficiency. They are large
to take advantage of economies-of-scale; their engines and accommodation
are packed to give maximum volume of cargo; and their hull shapes are a
perfect balance between cargo volume and sailing speed.

In addition to an efficient design, container vessels must be utilized maximally
to turn a profit. More specifically, a container vessel leaving a trade zone must
be stowed with a maximum number of high yielding containers, and the
containers must be distributed on the vessel such that the productivity in the
container terminals, the ship is calling on its service, is as high as possible. In
addition, the vessel must be seaworthy and the stowage must fulfil stacking
rules and separation rules among containers with dangerous goods.

15

===PAGE 15===
Chapter1 | Introduction

Technical understanding of container vessel stowage is essential for daily
operational decisions in stowage planning and uptake management. But it is
also central in tactical and strategic decisions of liner shipping companies,
including commercial decisions about which customer contracts to pursue on
a service to utilize the vessels maximally; fleet deployment decisions about
which vessels to assign to services; and even vessel design decisions to get
new builds that match cargo demands and compositions.

Despite the importance of container vessel stowage, this book is to our
knowledge the first to be published on the topic. The need for such a reference
has existed since the introduction of container vessels more than 60 years
ago. It has probably not been written earlier, because the number of stowage
centers and people involved despite the impact of their work is fairly small,
and because the topic for that reason has been considered marginal for
individual courses at the maritime schools and universities. We hope to change
all that and provide a reference for the industry, a handbook to stowage
planners, and a textbook for academia.

We start in this chapter by giving the historical background of containerization
and describing the essence of modern container vessel stowage. We then
discuss major business decisions in liner shipping companies and their
connection to stowage.

1.1 The Container Revolution

The container revolution started 26 April 1956, when Malcolm McLean refitted
a T-2 tanker called SS Ideal-X and carried 58 containers from Newark, New
Jersey to Houston. Before that date, individual cargo items were loaded and
unloaded manually by dockworkers using inefficeint work processes that
could take more than 50% of the time and cost of an ocean voyage (see Figure
1.1).

Various container systems were used before 1956, but Malcolm McLean with
his trucking background was the first to understand that the shipping
industry’s business was to move cargo and not sailing ships. In order to reduce
the cost of shipping, he not only invented the modern container, but also

16


===PAGE 16===
Chapter1 | Introduction

» Figure 1.1: Containerization
changed the handling cost
from $5.83 to 15.8 cents per
ton of cargo in 1956.

designed the automation of port handling. The result was a handling cost of
15.8 cents per ton of cargo on the first voyage of SS Ideal-X compared with
$5.83 per ton for break-bulk cargo handling, so it was a commercial success
[36].

A second tanker was converted in 1957 and was the first fully cellular vessel
with 226 twenty-foot equivalent units (TEU) capacity. The established
breakbulk liner companies, however, remained sceptical, probably because
they initially considered containerization a development of their existing liner
operations, and from this perspective the economics looked less attractive.
They considered alternative and less radical systems including shipping
standard pallets on pallet-friendly ships, and deep-sea ro-ros' that allowed
cargo to be loaded with fork-lifts. The economics of these systems, however,
was not as strong as dedicated container vessels, terminals, and truck
distribution networks, and deep-sea ro-ros has remained a niche business.
Eventually, when Malcolm McLean’s SeaLand company in 1966 opened its first
transatlantic service, the major European liner shipping companies were by
this time busy setting up their own container services [52]. Figure 1.2 shows
Malcom Mclean with the Newark container terminal in the background.

1 Roll-on-roll-off vessels.

17

===PAGE 17===
Chapter1 | Introduction

«Figure 1.2: Malcom McLean
with his Newark container
terminal in the background
(with permission from
A.P. Moller - Maersk’s
archive).

The impact of the container revolution was immense. Rather than embracing
the new technology, the unions of dockworkers in large ports like Port of New
York fought back and lost. In just two decades the container ports of New
Jersey had outcompeted Port of New York and the closeknit maritime societies
in Brooklyn had all but disappeared [36].

1.1.1 The Infrastructure of Containerization

Despite their fairly small size, the early container vessels were technically
challenging due to their open holds with cell guides to hold containers. The
holds were covered with steel hatch covers to prevent flooding of the holds.
They provided a platform on which containers could be stacked four or five
high. Inland investment in container-friendly trailers developed fast. When the
first European service started in 1966, more than 300 truckers had signed up
(52).

Avital component of the container service infrastructure was the terminals.
Earlier break-bulk liner ships would sit for weeks on miles of wharfs with
warehouses. Container terminals were entirely different. They had two or
threee berths with large rail mounted quay cranes backed up with open
storage yards. SeaLand used container trailer parks as yards, while other
operators stacked containers three or four high. Containers were retrieved
from the yard as needed using gantry cranes, fork-lifts, straddle carriers, and
trucks. Handling speeds were very high with each quay crane making between
15 to 30 lifts per hour. The increase in productivity was dramatic. General

18

===PAGE 18===
Chapter1 | Introduction

cargo berths typically could handle 100000 to 150000 tons per year, while the
new container terminals could handle 1-2 million tons per year per berth [52].

Another important component was the ISO standard container. It was
complicated to reach the dimensions of ISO containers. The most common ISO
lengths are 20’ and 40’, but the mathematical rationale of substituting one 40’
container with two 20’ containers was not necessarily commercially viable. In
fact 20’ containers were critiziced by US trucking companies, since
transporting one on a truck would be inefficient, but transporting two filled
containers would violate highway weight limits. European trucking companies
on the other hand were worried about manuvoring 40’ long containers in the
narrow streets typical for many European cities [36].

Finally, the containerization relied on advances in information technology in
the 1960s and 1970s for communication and to keep track of containers [52].

1.1.2 A Continuously Growing Business

Containerized shipping was an instant success with an average yearly growth
of the TEU capacity of the container vessel fleet of more than 30% from 1960
to 1975 [52]. Over the three decades leading to the financial crisis in 2008, it
grew with an average of 9% by TEU volume [32]. In these years, an important
factor for growth was an increasing containerization not only of manufactured
goods but also of commodities (such as coffee) and refrigerated cargo (fruit,
meat, fish) that traditionally have been carried on special vessels. After the
financial crisis, the growth rate has slowed down to about 5% per year leading
to overcapacity in the market. Nevertheless, this growth rate was still about
twice the average annual growth rate of global GDP in the same period [54].

Figure 1.3 shows the total container trade per year in TEU and the percentage
annual change since 1996. As depicted, 2009 was the first and only year with a
negative annual growth. The trade picked up quickly in 2010 due to the
stimulus packages after the financial crisis, but has settled at a rate below the
historical average.

19

===PAGE 19===
Chapter1 | Introduction

% annual
108 TEU change
200: 20. ¢Figure 1.3: Global container
180. trade 1996-2016 in TEUs
160. 15 and percentage average
140 19 change [54].
120.
100 5
80.
60. 1)
40 5
20.
0 -10
1996 2000 2005, 2010 2015

Year

Most vessels build today are gearless without on-board cranes. These vessels
rely on terminals with quay cranes for cargo handling. Figure 1.4 shows the
average number of liner shipping companies and the average container vessel
size and maximum vessel size per country from 2004 to 2016.

The trend in this period has been consolidation with bigger ships deployed by
fewer companies. Per country, the average container capacity of the largest
ships has more than doubled from 2812 TEU in 2004 to 6656 in 2016. In the
same period, the average number of companies have dropped by 34% from
22.1 to 14.6. This trend has changed the level of competition with shippers
having fewer options.

TEU

7000  ¢Figure 1.4: Trends in the

container vessel fleet.

Notice that data represents
5000 averages per country based

on vessel deployment in 160
4000 countries [54].

+ 6000

3000
2000
1000

2004 2007 2010 2013 2016

= Number of liner -e Containership + Maximum ship
shipping size (TEU) size (TEU)
companies

20

===PAGE 20===
Chapter1 | Introduction

1.2 Liner Shipping Business

A liner service is a fleet of container vessels with a common management that
provides a fixed schedule of calls at regular time intervals between named
ports.

The difference between a liner service and a tramp service is that the liner
shipping companies accept cargo from all customers and sail according to a
published schedule, whether the vessels are filled or not . The route network
of shipping lines form hub-and-spoke systems, where large vessels are used
between major ports of global trade zones like North America and Asia and
smaller feeder vessels are used to distribute the cargo within each trade zone.

Each service is a closed loop sailing route with the necessary number of
vessels assigned to the schedule. It is similar to a bus route on land albeit at a
larger scale. A service has a published schedule, where each port is called on
a fixed weekday and where transit times between ports are given. As an
example, Figure 1.5 shows the SLC service of Seago Line in the fall 2013
between Northern Europe and the Mediterranean. The south and northbound
schedule of the SLC service is shown in Table 1.1.

» Figure 1.5: The SLC route
map [47].

Acontainer vessel is rarely completely empty while in service, but since
domestic transportation within a trade zone (costal cargo) often is prohibited
by cabotage laws, the large vessels that connect trade zones have lowest

21

===PAGE 21===
Chapter1 | Introduction

Southbound Valencia, | Piraeus, | Gebze(Izmit | Ambarli_ | Gemlik, | Izmir
Spain Greece | Korfezi), | Istanbul, | Turkey (Aliaga),
Turkey Turkey Turkey

Felixstowe,
United Kingdom

Bremerhaven,
Germany

Antwerp,
Belgium

Valencia,
Spain

Northbound Valencia, Felixstowe, | Bremerhaven, | Antwerp,
Spain United Germany Belgium
Kingdom

Piraeus,
Greece

Gebze (Izmit
Korfezi), Turkey

Ambarli Istanbul,
Turkey

Gemlik,
Turkey

Izmir (Aliaga),
Turkey

Valencia,
Spain

Table 1.1: The SLC schedule showing departure and arrival weekday and transportation
time in days [47].

utilization in the turn ports of each trade zone and have highest utilization in
the last call of a trade zone. A service between trade zones normally has a
fronthaul? and backhaul direction. The fronthaul direction is the primary
direction of the trade and where the service generates its main profit.
Between Asia and Europe, the fronthaul is from Asia to Europe. While the

2 Other commonly used names are headhaul and strong leg.

22

===PAGE 22===
Chapter1 | Introduction

fronthaul is characterized by high-yield cargo like electronics, the backhaul
may have a significant amount of empty containers and low-yield cargo like
waste paper.

As realized by Malcolm McLean, the core business of liner shipping is to move
cargo and not to sail ships. Today this goes beyond having inexpensive service
networks and low transit times. Liner shipping companies must enable
logistics providers to efficiently manage lean supply chains of global
industries and support transport of demanding cargo like fresh products and
dangerous goods.

From a commercial point of view, the main objective of a liner service is to
maximize the profit on its fronthauls. This has several implications: 1) the
network must be designed such that it has services with profitable cargo and
competitive transit times, 2) vessels assigned to a service must fit the
composition and amount of profitable cargo, 3) the tendered cargo and daily
sale of cargo bookings on services must be optimized to ensure a cargo
composition with high profitability and utilization of the vessels (uptake
management and cargo flow management), and 4) the stowage of vessels must
ensure the planned utilization, while minimizing operational costs and
securing the reliability of the service.

It is worth to notice that the stowage characteristics of vessels is central to all
of these commercial decisions and for that reason is core knowledge of the
liner shipping companies. Below, we describe each decision area in more
detail.

1.2.1 Network Design

The industry is tightly coupled to the world economy and must due to its low
margins adapt fast to short and long-term trends. For that reason, strategic
decisions like ordering new vessels and changing the service network often
are bets on the world economy. Daily commercial and operational decisions
like stowage planning on the other hand are aiming at generating maximum
profit from the current fixed state of the fleet and network.

23

===PAGE 23===
Chapter1 | Introduction

The service network of a liner shipping company is published to customers and
changes to the network are informed well in advance in time. Many changes
are caused by well-known seasonal fluctuations of demand. Examples of this
are Christmas in the West, Chinese New Year in the East, and fruit harvest
seasons. Individual services are introduced, discontinued, and adjusted to
accommodate these changes often following a predictable pattern from year
to year.

Other changes are pushed by commercial interests (e.g., to establish new
markets, to take market shares from competitors, and to cater for prioritized
customers). Sometimes managers of different regions of the network have
opposing interests. To resolve such issues, it can be necessary to estimate the
impact of the suggested changes on the global service network. This can be
done by simulating the flow of cargo on the new network and measure the
network’s ability to satisfy expected future demand and move empty
containers back to regions where they are needed.

A tedious aspect of making a new service is that it must have a fixed schedule,
where each port is called on a particular day of the week and in a fixed window
of time. In practice this means that the total travel distance of the port
rotation divided with the average sailing distance per week per ship must
equal an integral number of ships. It might even be hard to book all the
required time windows from the terminals. For that reason, large network
changes can be difficult to make and may require 20-30 planning iterations
among the involved teams to finalize.

Network design is connected to container vessel stowage because the vessels
assigned to a service must have sufficient volume, weight, and reefer capacity
to carry the expected cargo. It also must be verified that port operations can
be completed within the duration of the assigned time windows.

1.2.2 Fleet Management

Fleet management includes strategic decisions about new vessel orders and
vessel chartering as well as tactical decisions about how to deploy the current
fleet.

24

===PAGE 24===
Chapter1 | Introduction

Investments in new vessels are long term financial decisions with high impact.
They are often bets on business cycles in the world economy or on trends of
emerging markets. Knowing when to build and what to build are core
competences of successful liner shipping companies. Secrecy about the true
capacity of new vessels can be a significant competitive parameter. An
example of this is the E-class of Maersk Line that when launched in 2006 had
an official capacity of 11000 TEU, which was 29% lower than its final
announced capacity of 15500 TEU.

Vessel chartering enables the companies to build a flexible capacity buffer
above the capacity of their own vessels so that the total capacity and
composition of the fleet can be changed fast without significant economic
loses.

The main parameter for both decisions is the capacity of the fleet that must fit
expected future demands and freight rates. But the stowage characteristic of
vessels is also important as it decides the trade-off between weight, volume,
and reefer capacity for different cargo compositions that in turn depend on
which trades the company is betting on.

The stowage characteristic of vessels is even more important for fleet
deployment which is the tactical decision of assigning current vessels to
services. Ideally, a vessel class assigned to a service must be able to have
maximum intake of cargo with highest yield on the service without sacrificing
crane productivity in ports, optimal trim, and plan robustness. Again, region
managers may compete for resources and the company must be able to find
the best overall solution by using quantitative analysis of the stowage
capabilities of its vessels.

1.2.3 Daily Operation

As stated above, daily commercial and operational decisions are aiming at
generating maximum profit from the current state of the fleet and network. In
general, liner shipping companies decompose these decisions into a three
tiered hierarchy:

25

===PAGE 25===
Chapter1 | Introduction

1. Uptake management,
2. Cargo flow management, and
3. Stowage planning.

In the following, we describe each of these functions in more detail.

Uptake Management

The uptake management function is responsible for the commercial
profitability of the service and has the last say on all sales related and
operational decisions such as port omissions and inducements. When a
service is active, most companies assign a service manager that is
accountable for its profitability. The daily commercial decisions of a service is
about getting as much high yield cargo on the vessels as possible. This work
has two major objectives:

1. Track each vessel of the service and continuously predict how large a
fraction of its bookings that will turn into actual cargo, and

2. Control the sale of cargo bookings to each vessel and manage booking
agreements with key clients to ensure that the utilization of the vessels is
maximized with a high yield cargomix.

A particular problem is downfall which in some ports can be as much as 50%
of the booked cargo. Another challenge is vessel sharing agreements (VSAs),
where the capacity of a vessel is shared with another liner shipping company
and the composition of VSA cargo is unknown. In both cases, uptake managers
must rely on historical data, current bookings and experience to determine the
most likely cargo forecast.

Uptake management relies heavily on container vessel stowage knowledge,
since the core task is to achieve a stowable composition of actual cargo on the
fronthaul with maximum total yield.

Cargo Flow Management

The responsibility of the cargo flow management or capacity management
function is to decide which vessels on the service take the cargo booked by

26

===PAGE 26===
Chapter1 | Introduction

uptake management. These decisions for a port are typically initiated a week
before the vessel arrive. The objective is to maximize the total yield of the
selected containers while at the same time ensuring that the vessel can be
stowed seaworthy and efficiently in terms of operational costs. High yield
cargo includes reefer containers that require refrigeration and special cargo
such as over-dimensioned containers and dangerous goods. The team must
also ensure that containers are shipped in time. If some containers were rolled
in at the last call of the service, they may need to be prioritized even if they
have low yield. The prioritization also depends on the status of the booking. A
booking becomes active when the empty container to hold the cargo has been
picked up or delivered to the customer. Active bookings get higher priority
because they are more likely to happen. The final outcome is loadlists that are
handed over to the stowage planners of the vessels.

Cargo flow management also ensures that the capacity of the network is
utilized optimally. In practice, this is done by controlling the fraction of cargo
on different trades on a service so that they are close to a commercially
determined port-to-port allocation on the service that is profitable and leads
to high utilization of the global network.

Some customers, even tendered customers with service contracts, book the
same cargo on multiple vessels of different liner shipping companies due to
the lack of penalties for not showing up with cargo.

Clearly, cargo flow management requires deep understanding of container
vessel stowage. The produced loadlists must be stowable even if the capacity
of the ship is fully utilized. Since this ideal situation can be hard to achieve,
loadlists may include optional containers that the stowage planners are
allowed to roll.

Stowage Planning

The stowage planning department has the highest technical expertise on
container vessel stowage in the company. It has no direct commercial
responsibility, but assists the uptake management team. For instance, if a key
customer considers to book a significant amount of out-of-gauge (O0G)
containers that have negative impact on other cargo, the stowage planning

27

===PAGE 27===
Chapter1 | Introduction

team may test-stow the different possible cargomix scenarios to help decide
whether or not to accept the booking.

The primary responsibility of the stowage planning department is operational.
It must generate stowage plans for the loadlists produced by the cargo flow
management team. Its primary objective is to maximize the utilization of the
vessels on the fronthaul. Its secondary objective is to minimize operational
costs and produce plans that are robust to unreliable cargo forecasts.

This may sound simple enough, but in reality it is an extremely challenging
optimization problem. To understand why, consider the situation illustrated in
Figure 1.7.

Region 1

= . 2a
ar ar

—_—, ——

a,

Figure 1.7: Service connecting two trade regions.

The shown service connects two trade regions with an ocean leg in between.
Assume that the fronthaul is from left to right and that the factor that limits
utilization on the fronthaul is the volume capacity of the vessel rather than
weight capacity. Further, assume that the turn ports (i.e., ports where the
vessel is furthest away from the ocean leg and therefore is most empty) are
the left most and right most ports. The leftmost "Current Port” is the port that
the vessel visits next. The stowage planning department has between four to
six hours to make a stowage plan for the vessel and it must be send to the
terminal about 12 hours prior to arrival. As is common practice, we use color
codes for discharge ports. The current port has color code brown and all

28

===PAGE 28===
Chapter1 | Introduction

brown containers on the vessel are discharged in this port. The container
stacks shown next to each port are the containers to load in the port.

We can now study in more detail how the primary objective of maximizing the
utilization of the vessel on the fronthaul can be achieved. In this example, the
vessel is volume pressed on the fronthaul. This means that all export
containers that will be on the vessel on the fronthaul has to be stowed such
that no positions on the vessel are killed. For instance, if a stack has 10
positions and a maximum weight capacity of 80 tons, then we would have
killed six positions if we choose to stow four 20 tons containers in the stack.
The stowage planner also has to keep the yield of containers in mind. A
refrigerated container and a container with dangerous goods have a higher
yield than a normal container, so these must be prioritized if it is not possible
to stow all the containers in the loadlist. It is also important to stow the
current port such that the capacity for these high-yield containers is not killed
in future ports. Coastal cargo shipped between ports within the region is not
on the vessel on the fronthaul. For that reason, it is less important to stow it
volume dense.

It can be a puzzle in itself to minimize the number of killed positions on the
fronthaul since the stowage planner at the same time has to ensure that all
seaworthiness requirements such as line of sight, stability, and stress limits
are satisfied. It becomes a hard combinatorial problem, however, when
secondary commercial objectives also are taken into account. The secondary
commercial objectives are centered around minimizing operational costs,
which in practice means to minimize port stays as this leads to low port fees
and makes it possible to reduce sailing speed or catch up when behind
schedule. This is achieved by minimizing the quay crane work time by
minimizing the number of containers that must be restowed, and distributing
the crane moves along the vessel such that a maximum number of quay cranes
can work in parallel on the ship. To avoid that containers block each other and
hence must be restowed, the planners try not to mix containers with different
ports of discharge in a storage area of the vessel. To ensure that many cranes
can work in parallel on the vessel, they build up several areas with the same
port of discharge along it.

29

===PAGE 29===
Chapter1 | Introduction

A final challenge of stowage planning is that cargo forecasts in most
companies are unreliable. A major reason for this is that customers do not
have to pay for space they have booked on the vessel, but decide not to use.
They only pay for cargo that is actually transported and there are no booking
fees. As a result, the amount of downfall or ”no-shows” in some ports can be
up to 50%. Planners respond by "keeping the doors open” in a stowage plan.
For instance, another good reason for not mixing discharge ports in a storage
area on the vessel is that the area will be fully emptied in the port of discharge
and therefore most flexible for any new usage. The planners also consider how
to build up these areas. For instance, if a port downstream has four cranes but
the planner is unsure how much cargo to discharge in this port, then the
planner may choose to get started on the four areas of cargo to the port
already in the current port, rather than say just making one of them. In this
way, the planner already in the current port has ensured that four cranes can
work efficiently in parallel in the discharge port, but at the same time, the
planner has the flexibility to add more cargo to these areas in intermediate
ports.

1.2.4 Internal Communication

There is a natural ordering of daily decisions. First uptake management sells
the cargo; then cargo flow management routes it on the network and
generates loadlist; and finally the stowage planning department decides
where to place the cargo on the vessels. Due to the volatility of cargo and the
need to utilize the capacity of the vessels maximally, however, there also are
strong feedback loops between these decisions.

For example, if the stowage planner has unused capacity on the vessel after
stowing all the containers on the loadlist, the planner may contact cargo
management to get more containers to load. Capacity management in turn
may ask uptake management to sell more cargo out of the port if they are
short of cargo. In the other direction, uptake management may consult the
stowage planning department to find out what the capacity is of a vessel given
different mixes of cargo that they consider to ship.

The more communication between these departments, the more the liner
shipping company can cope with unexpected events and take advantage of

30

===PAGE 30===
Chapter1 | Introduction

commercial opportunities. Such communication, on the other hand, also
makes the decisions less structured and possibly harder to control and
improve.

This has lead to two significantly different organizational forms in the liner
shipping companies. In one end of the spectre, we have the linear organization
shown in Figure 1.8, where decisions are divided up and perfected within their
scope. The departments may even by located in different continents.
Communication and feedback loops still exist between the departments, but
mainly via phone and email.

Stowage
Planning

Figure 1.8: The linear organization form.

At the other end of the spectre, we have the clique organization shown in
Figure 1.9, where the departments are co-located and may even share the
same floor. Thus, a stowage planner can walk to a cargo flow manager and
discuss what cargo to add to the loadlist rather than depending on an email
exchange over two time zones. This may lead to faster response to
opportunities and issues, but due to the distributed nature of each function,
they are harder to optimize.

> Figure 1.9:The clique
organization form.

Cargo Flow Stowage
Management Planning

31

===PAGE 31===
32

===PAGE 32===
Chapter2 | Containers

CHAPTER 2
Containers

The intermodal container is a powerful commercial concept that despite
widespread standardization has lead to many different types in use today.
Since containers of different type can interact in many complex ways ina
stowage plan, it is important to know the physical characteristics of
containers and the stowage rules and preferences associated with each type.

Section 2.1 introduces the basic characteristics of ISO containers that form
the backbone of containerized shipping. Section 2.2 describes all the
container types that are common in the cargo compositions of the major trade
lines today. It covers all aspects of these containers that are relevant for
stowage planning including physical dimensions and design, cargo weight
limits, and tolerance to external forces. A few common container types
outside the ISO standard are included. The section moreover describes
stowage rules that solely are caused by the design of containers. Most
stowage rules and preferences, however, are due to a combination of container
and vessel requirements, operational restrictions, and even uncertainty of
cargo forecasts. These aspects will be covered in the next three chapters.
Finally, Section 2.3 gives an overview of the ISO containers covered in the
chapter.

2.1 The ISO Container

Containers are often referred to as boxes or units by stowage planners. An ISO
container is defined according to the following ISO standards: 668, 830, 1161,
6346, 1496-(1-5) [25]. It is a boxed formed transport equipment strong enough
to be used repeatedly. The container is designed to be used for multiple
modes of transportation and it should be easy to fill and empty.

2.1.1 Physical Dimensions

ISO containers vary in length and height. The unit of measure is US inch (2.54
cm) and foot (30.48 cm). The dominating lengths are 20’, 40’, and 45”. In

33

===PAGE 33===
Chapter2 | Containers

Northern America, it is also common to use 48’ and 53’ non-ISO containers.
Container vessels may carry 48’ and 53’ containers to and from this region, but
they are rarely seen on other trade lanes. 45’, 48’ and 53’ containers go beyond
the standard 40’ cell length of a container vessel and for that reason have the
same stowage challenges. Since the 45’ container by far is the most common
of these over length containers, we restrict our coverage here to 45’
containers.

ISO containers are 8’ wide, but there exits pallet wide containers outside the
ISO standard that are slightly wider so they can fit EU pallets. Pallet wide
containers are rare.

The standard height is 8’6”. Containers with this height are often referred to as
dry cargo or DC containers. There is only one other height category which is
high-cube or HC containers. These are 9’6” high (i.e., one foot higher than DCs).

Table 2.1 shows the main dimensions of standard ISO containers. A graphical
representation of ISO containers is shown in Figure 2.1.

Length 20° 40° 45"| Table 2.1:1SO standard
SS sizes.
Height 8'6" (9'6") 8'6" (9°6") 8'6" (9'6")

Width 8 e Pa

Notice that the maximum container weight is independent of length. In
practice this means that the average weight density of 20’ containers is about
twice as high as that for 40’ and 45’ containers. For that reason laden 20°
containers are considered heavy cargo. The typical weight of an empty
container is between two and five tons.

The frequency of the different length and height combinations is far from
uniform. Even though high-cube 20’ containers exist they are rare and even
banned by some liner shipping companies. 45’ containers, on the other hand,
are almost always high-cubes. In general, since most freight rates do not
distinguish between HC and DC containers, customers prefer to ship HC

34

===PAGE 34===
Chapter2 | Containers

Standard

fl

20° 20°
40° High-cube
HI
'
45° 8

Figure 2.1: Most common ISO standard containers.

containers due to the extra free volume. For that reason, the fraction of HC
containers often go to the limit of what the vessels can transport without
losing capacity. Sometimes this can be more than 60% HCs.

2.1.2 Structure and Strength

ISO containers are composed of a steal framework, which is their weight
bearing element. As shown in Figure 2.2, the framework is composed of two
bottom and two top side rails. The floor is supported by a number of cross
members, and the roof by a top cross member and a door header. The walls,
roof, and the door are the weakest parts of the container structure and are not
able to bear any considerable weight.

Each container is equipped with corner fittings at each of the four, top and
bottom, corners of the steal framework. Corner fittings are there to ensure
that any load or stress on a container is passed on to the underlying
framework. As shown in Figure 2.2, each corner fitting has a number of
apertures, where securing and lifting devises can be attached. Examples of

35

===PAGE 35===
Chapter2 | Containers

Top end rail

Top side rails

Corner fitting
Aperture

Corner
Posts Ny
Bottom cross
members
Door header

Bottom side rails

Figure 2.2: Container structure.

such devices are, twistlocks and lashing rods. Their usage will be described in
detail in the next chapter. 45’ containers (and longer ones), are equipped with
intermediate corner fittings to allow them to be stacked on top of one 40’ or
two 20’ containers. Figure 2.3 shows the position of the intermediate corner
fittings of a 45’ container and how they can be used for stacking purposes.
These extra fittings also allow the use of standard lifting equipments, e.g.

40’ spreaders on terminal quay cranes.

Extra corner fittings

Figure 2.3: Intermediate fittings.

36

===PAGE 36===
Chapter2 | Containers

Since containers are stored in stacks, both in the terminals and on the
vessels, the underlying steal framework must be able to withstand high
vertical pressure. According to the ISO standard, 20’, 40’ and 45’ containers
must be able to support a weight of 384 tons of the containers stowed on top
of them. The same is required for intermediate corner fittings. Thus, ISO
containers can be stacked approximately 11 high without breaking structural
limits. Today, actual stacking height has reached this limit. The ISO+ standard
has higher limits, but is not in general use.

The framework structure should also be able to resist being lifted while
holding a load of 61 tons (twice the nominal value). In addition, containers
must withstand longitudinal and transversal stresses due to the dynamic
forces at play during transport. A graphical representation of the stacking,
lifting and dynamic stress strength requirements is shown in Figure 2.4. The
figure also shows strength requirements of the sides and end walls, the roof
and the floor. Those requirements are there to ensure that the container can
handle the cargo loading and unloading process.

75 kN
3770 ka (384 t) run oe,
: ae
—
75 kN
3770 KN (384 t)

4

Ty 11

Figure 2.4: Container strengths.

2.2 Container Types

In this section, we describe the different container types. We use the naming
and classification conventions used in the stowage planning profession. These
may divert slightly from the ones used in the ISO standard.

37

===PAGE 37===
Chapter2 | Containers

Container types are primarily defined by length and height parameters. Ad-
ditional typing is based on their purpose and shape such as refrigerated con-
tainers, tank containers, and open top containers. The container type does not
depend on cargo weight, but since weight can have great impact on how the
container can be stowed, it is acommon practice to divide containers into
weight classes and distinguish empty containers from laden.

2.2.1 Standard (DC) and High-Cube (HC) Containers

The dimensions of DC and HC ISO containers for general cargo are shown in
Figure 2.1. The short notation often used for these types are 20DC, (20HC),
40DC, 40HC, (45DC), and 45HC. A parenthesis denotes that the type is rare.

Since 20’ containers can hold cargo with a weight density that is approxi-
mately twice as high as for 40’ and 45’ containers, they are suitable for heavy
cargo. 40HC and 45HC containers on the other hand are suitable for light
cargo.

The stowage rules that follow directly from the dimensions of these container
types are:

= A 20’ container cannot be stowed on top of a 40’ or 45’ container. This rule
follows directly from the fact the 40’ and 45’ containers do not have
intermediate corner fittings in the center. Thus, a stack can hold no further
20’ containers after the first 40’ or 45’ container is placed in it.

= A40’ or 45’ container cannot be stowed on top of a 20DC and 20HC
container due to the height difference.

These rules are illustrated in Figure 2.5. It is physically possible to stack a 40’
container on top of a 45’ container, but due to problems with lashing the 40’
container, this is normally not allowed. We will discuss this further in next
chapter.

38

===PAGE 38===
Chapter2 | Containers

Figure 2.5: Type stowage rules for different length and height of containers.

2.2.2 Open Top (OT) and Open Side Containers

Open top containers have rigid side walls and a removable roof typically made
of soft material such as canvas or plastic. The roof is often supported by
removable roof bows which are also used to stabilize and reinforce the
structure of the container. The short notation used for these types are 200T
and 40OT. Open side containers have removable sides. These containers are
suitable for items that are either too large or too awkward to be packed in via
the end doors. Figure 2.6 shows an example of an open top container.

4 Figure 2.6:A 40’ open top
container.

39

===PAGE 39===
Chapter2 | Containers

2.2.3 Flat Rack Containers

Flat racks consist of a floor structure with a high loading capacity composed
of a steel frame and a softwood floor and two end walls, which may either be
fixed or collapsible. The end walls are stable enough to allow cargo securing
means to be attached and several flatracks to be stacked on top of one
another. Flatracks are available in 20’ and 40’ sizes. They are required to have
the same handling and securing features as ISO containers. Figure 2.7 shows
an example of 40’ flat rack container.

4 Figure 2.7: A 40’ flat rack
container.

2.2.4 Artificial Tween Deck (ATD)

An artificial tween deck consists solely of a floor structure with extremely high
loading capacity. They have no side or end walls. This high loading capacity
makes it possible to concentrate heavy weights on small areas. An ATD
consists of a steel frame and a wooden floor structure. ATDs are used
principally for oversized and very heavy cargo. Figure 2.8 shows an example of
40’ ATD.

4 Figure 2.8:A 40’ articial
tween deck (ATD).

40

===PAGE 40===
Chapter2 | Containers

2.2.5 Out Of Gauge Containers (OOG)

Cargo may go outside the bounds of open top, open side, flat rack, or ATDs.
Such containers are referred to as over dimensioned or out-of-gauge (OOG)
containers. OOG containers are difficult to stow because they occupy space
beyond a standard container. In return, OOG containers are profitable and
hence important to fit on the vessel. Figure 2.9 shows examples of OOG
containers.

Fe

Figure 2.9: Out of gauge (O0G) containers.

An 0OG container on the loadlist has information about in which dimensions, it
is oversized compared to a standard container. The stowage planner uses this
information to determine how close other containers can be stowed to the
OOG. There are a number of best practices about where to stow OOGs on the
vessel and how to protect them with other containers that we discuss in the
next chapter.

2.2.6 Break Bulk Cargo (BB)

Break bulk cargo is cargo that is oversized or too heavy to be stowed unitized
(i.e., stowed in a container). BB cargo can be anything that fits on the vessel
like a windmill wing, a small ship, and a generator. Like OOG cargo, BB cargo is
profitable and important to carry despite the hassle of stowing it. BB cargo is
either carried directly on a hatch cover or on the bottom of a vessel bay.
Otherwise, a plain floor of ATDs is build up to hold the BB cargo as shown in
Figure 2.10.

4)

===PAGE 41===
Chapter2 | Containers

4 Figure 2.10: Break bulk
cargo ona floor of ATDs.

2.2.7 Reefer Containers (RF)

Areefer container has an integral refrigeration unit for controlling the
temperature inside the container. Such containers are designed to be able to
hold an internal temperature of -18°C with an outside temperature of 45°C.
Today some reefer containers even go as low as -60°C e.g. for high quality
transport of frozen fish to the Japanese market. The refrigeration unit is
arranged in such a way that the external dimensions of the container meet ISO
standards. The presence of an integral refrigeration unit causes a loss of
internal volume and payload. When being transported by ship, integral units
have to be connected to the on-board power supply system. The connectors
are usually placed near reefer cells, but the position is not that critical, since
it is common for reefer containers to have cables of more than 15 meters.
When at the terminal, the containers are connected to the terminal’s power
supply system.

The refrigeration unit is cooled by a fan. If they are stowed below deck, the
ventilation system of the vessel must be powerful enough to remove the
generated heat away from the hold. Some reefer containers allow a supply of
cooling water instead. Vessels designed for stowing such containers below
deck normally have a ventilation system with low capacity such that only a
limited number of ordinary air-cooled reefers can be stowed in hold.

Reefer containers normally carry foodstuffs and must be manufactured with
materials that prevent adverse effects on cargo. The internal area must be
designed without pockets that cannot be reached by conventional cleaning
methods. Moreover, they must be waterproof and airtight.

42

===PAGE 42===
Chapter2 | Containers

Reefers have a high profit margin, so it is very important to stow as many of
them on the vessel as possible. On some trade lines, like trade lines from
South America, the reefer containers drive the trade and thus the stowage of
the container vessels. Reefer containers are often seasonal, following fruit,
vegetables, and fishing seasons.

The typical short notation for a 20DC, 40DC, 20HC, and 40HC reefer container
is 20RF, 40RF, 20HR, and 4OHR, respectively. A reefer container with power
cable is shown in Figure 2.11(a). We discuss how to stow reefers further in the
next chapter.

2.2.8 Insulated Containers

This type of container is a refrigerated container without an integral refriger-
ation unit. The lack of a refrigeration unit allows such containers to have a
larger internal volume and payload than integral units. On board, the inside of
the container is supplied with cold air via the ships central cooling plant. The
air flows through the container in the same way as in integral units. Cold air is
blown in at the bottom and the warm air is removed at the top (see Figure
2.11(b)). Insulated containers are no longer produced and container vessels
that fit them are rare.

= Refrigerating
+ unit

(a) (b) (c)

Figure 2.11: Thermal containers. (a) A reefer container with power cable. (b) An insulated (porthole)
container. (c) A heated container.

43

===PAGE 43===
Chapter 2 | Containers

2.2.9 Heated Containers

Heated containers have heating appliances. Heated containers can keep an
internal temperature of 16°C with and an outside temperature of —20°C.
Heated, insulated, and reefer containers are referred to as thermal containers
in the ISO standard. Figure 2.11(c) shows a heated container.

2.2.10 Tank Containers (TK)

Tank containers are composed of one or more tanks surrounded by a steel
framework. The tanks are fixed to the framework which must obey the same
dimensions and strength requirement of an ISO container. Tanks can be used
to transport liquids, gases, and dry bulk. Transported dry bulk must be, or can
be rendered, capable of fluid flow. The content of the tanks may be
pressurized, and the tanks themselves are manufactured to withstand the
dynamic forces created by the cargo during transportation. Due to the high
weight density of tank containers, they are typically 20’. TK is often used to
denote tank containers (e.g., 20TK).

Some tanks containers are provided with refrigerated or heating units, to
maintain, for example, safety temperatures during the transportation of
dangerous goods. Extra safety measures might be taken in tanks for the
transport of dangerous goods to avoid spillage. Figure 2.12 shows a 20’ tank
container.

4 Figure 2.12: A 20’ tank
container.

44

===PAGE 44===
Chapter2 | Containers

Flexitanks are 20DC ISO containers fitted with a balloon container inside
typically made of nylon or polyurethan composite material. Figure 2.13 shows a
20’ flexitank container.

> Figure 2.13: A 20’ flexitank
container.

2.2.11 Dry Bulk Containers

Aside from tanks, dry bulk like grain and fertilizer can be transported in dry
bulk containers, where the cargo will not be pressurized. There are two kinds
of dry bulk containers: box type, equipped with doors in one of the end walls
which allows the containers to be use for general purpose cargo, and hopper
type intended for horizontal discharge and without any doors. Both container
types must be equipped with suitable cargo loading opening and must be
weather-proof. The internal constructions of the container allows for full
discharge of the cargo. Figure 2.14 shows a 20’ drybulk container.

Access

» Figure 2.14: A 20’ drybulk
container.

45

===PAGE 45===
Chapter 2 | Containers

2.2.12 Pallet Wide Containers

Pallet wide containers fall outside the ISO standard. They have been
manufactured to improve the space utilization for cargo packed in European
pallets. A pallet wide container is sightly wider than standard ISO container
and use the small gap (a few centimetres) between container stacks on the
vessel. Pallet wide containers are 40’ or 45’ with 45’ as the most frequent type.
They are mostly used for road or rail transport, since shipping lines due to
their oversize charge for them as OOG, which makes them relatively expensive
compared to standard containers. There are three types of pallet wide
containers:

Pwo Also called sea-cell. The corrugated sides of these containers fit into
each other such that they can accommodate pallets and still be placed
side-by-side.

PW3 These containers are 3 cm extra wide and require at least one standard
container for every two PW3 containers placed side-by-side.

PW6 These containers are 6 cm extra wide and must have a standard
container on each side.

Pallet wide containers are often seen on the Asia to Europe trade line.

2.2.13 Empty Containers

Empty containers are of course not a container type in themselves. For
stowage purposes, however, it is important to distinguish between laden
containers with cargo and empty containers without cargo. An empty reefer
container for instance does not need a reefer plug and on some vessels, the
number of laden 20’ containers that can be stacked on top of each other is
limited to satisfy permissible stack weight requirements.

2.2.14 Dangerous Good Containers (DG)

Containers with dangerous cargo are referred to as DG, IMDG or IMO
containers. DG, 0OG, and RF containers are often called specials by stowage

46

===PAGE 46===
Chapter2 | Containers

planners. A container is a DG container, if it contains hazardous and noxious
substances independent of what type, it otherwise has (i.e., it can be a 20TK,
20DC, 40HR or any other type).

DG containers are classified according to the International Maritime
Dangerous Goods code or IMDG code for short. The IMDG codes are updated
every two years by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) which is a
specialised agency of the United Nations responsible for regulating shipping.
The purpose of the IMDG code is to protect crew members and avoid marine
pollution. It applies not only to the mariner, but also terminals, trucking
companies, depots, and other industries and services involved in container
shipping. The IMDG code defines terminology, cargo packaging, markings,
stowage, segregation, handling, and emergency response.

There are nine main IMDG cargo classes, 1-9. Table 2.2 describes the harmful
substances of these classes. A DG container must be marked with the
associated IMDG cargo placard. DG containers must be segregated on the
vessel. The segregation rules are described in the next chapter.

2.3 ISO Container Identifiers

Each ISO container type is identified by a four letter/digit code used widely in
the industry. Table 2.3 describes the container types of frequent ISO
identifiers.

47

===PAGE 47===
Chapter2 | Containers

Materials that can detonate and Dynamite, various
explode. detonators,

ammunition, fireworks.

2.2 Gases that can displace atmospheric Nitrogen, carbon
Non-Toxic, Non- oxygen causing suffocation. These ma- | dioxide, oxygen.
Flammable Gasses terials are often stored under pressure

causing an additional hazard.

3 Liquids that produce vapours that can Petrol, benzene,
Flammable Liquids ignite in air or in contact with an ignition | acetone, MEK,
source. kerosene.

4.2 Materials that can self-heat leading to Hay, coal, oil seeds.
Spontaneously combustion.
Combustible

51 Materials that can release oxygen and Sodium nitrate, potas-
Oxidizing Agents increase the intensity and burning rate | sium chlorate, ammo-
of a fire. nium nitrate, calcium
hypochlorite.

61 Materials that can cause death or injury
Toxic Substances when swallowed, inhaled or brought into
contact with skin.

7 Materials that emit ionizing radiation, Uranium, plutonium,
Radioactive which can affect the body’s cells and strontium.
Materials disrupt other metabolic processes.

9
Miscellaneous
Dangerous Goods

Table 2.2: MDG classes of harmful substances [10] (label reprint with permission from IMO [40]).

Materials that present a hazard not
covered by any of the above classes. The
danger associated with the material is
usually unique to that substance.

Dry ice, asbestos,
hot bitumen, molten
aluminium.


===PAGE 48===
Chapter2 | Containers

Peano | ase |= |iiibveandconaier
Pain| aise | = |inapaaterendcrtane
a
Pair] arsee | = |atackwtn tides
woxee | zo
a
Pao | ane | = |vatnogetaconane
Saco | wee | an
Peano | wete |= |iigreiawconsier
Pan | wae | oo
Pars | ante |= |Opmatedcatanes
Paco | wsee | ac
Peas | wx |= |sathgitgetpcmiing

Table 2.3: 1SO identifiers for frequent container types. "Mark" is the short notation of the type used
widely in the industry and in this book.

49

===PAGE 49===
50

===PAGE 50===
Chapter3 | Vessels

CHAPTER 3

Vessels

In the last chapter, we described the different container types in daily use by
liner shipping companies and covered how they interact in simple stacks. In
this chapter, we broaden our view by considering these stacks on board
container vessels.

In Section 3.1 and 3.2, we first describe the evolution of container vessels and
their cellular design. Section 3.3 then describes seaworthiness requirements
that affect the master planning of the vessel (i.e., the overall distribution of
weight and volume of containers over vessel bays). Finally, Section 3.4
describes stowage requirements and preferences caused by the interplay
between bay design, safety requirements, and container types, when slot
planning the vessel (i.e., when building stacks in bays).

3.1 Vessel Evolution

Container vessels have increased continuously in size driven by the principle
of economies of scale, the increasing demand for goods, and the ever growing
number of commodities that can be transported in containers. Figure 3.1
shows the introduction of new vessel types and their dimensions.

Malcolm McLean’s SS Ideal-X was a T-2 oil tanker from World War II converted
in 1956 to carry 58 containers. The first vessel specifically designed for the
transportation of containers was built in 1960 and had a capacity of 610 TEU,
see Figure 3.1(A). Panamax and Panamax Max vessels are the biggest that fit
the original Panama Canal with its 305 m long and 33.3 m wide lock chambers
and maximum draft of 12.5 m, see Figure 3.1(B). Post Panamax and Panamax
Plus vessels exceed these dimensions, see Figure 3.1(C). In June 2016, an
extension of the Panama Canal opened. New Panamax vessels fit the
dimensions of the extension, see Figure 3.1(D). Post New Panamax vessels and
Ultra Large Container Vessels (ULCV) exceed them, see Figure 3.1(E).

51

===PAGE 51===
Chapter3 | Vessels

6 cont. across
Early Containerships SS, 4cont. high[[)
(1956-) 137x17x9 (LOA x Beam x Draft) 8
A 300-800 TEU or 400
200x20x9 10
Fully Cellular (1970-) iQ
tooo-2500Teu Wey 4
215x20x10
Panamax (1980-)
3000-3400 TEU
B 250x32x12.5

Panamax Max (1985-)

3400-4500 TEU

Post Panamax (1988) [7 | [_ L——}
4000-5000 TEU

Post Panamax Plus (2000-)

6000-8000 TEU 7

New Panamax (2014-)
12500 TEU

Post New Panamax (2006-) 23

10
a S
18000 TEU 400x59x15.5 8

Figure 3.1: The evolution of container vessels.

Not surprisingly, the ULCV vessels are most economical, but they are also very
large and challenging to fill in practice. To that end, liner shipping companies
apply hub-and-spoke networks, where ULCV vessels sail on major routes (e.g.,
connecting Asia and Europe) and feeder vessels supply and distribute cargo
from these vessels. Figure 3.2 shows a typical feeder vessel with a capacity of
1000-3000 TEU. In addition to using hub-and-spoke networks, carriers also
enter vessel sharing agreements (VSAs), where several companies supply
vessels to a service and carry each other’s cargo.

Old vessels are uneconomical and may be expensive to upgrade to fulfil
environmental requirements. They are often scraped, but since the capacity of
vessels must fit the demand of the services they sail on, companies also need
new vessels in the middle range of 5000-10000 TEU.

52

===PAGE 52===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Figure 3.2: A typical feeder vessel.

Feeder vessels and other smaller container vessels may call ports without
quay cranes. Such vessels need cranes of their own and are called geared
vessels. The crane design can vary, but swinging cranes as shown in Figure 3.3
are common.

Many African ports lack quay cranes and require geared vessels. Geared
vessels have stowage planning challenges of their own. As shown in Figure 3.3,
the cranes have limited height. This means that containers often must be
loaded and discharged in a specific horizontal order in the bays. Such
horizontal overstowage combined with the usual vertical overstowage caused
by the different port of discharge of the containers in the stacks can make
stowage planning of geared vessels particularly hard.

Figure 3.3: A typical geared vessel with swinging cranes to load and discharge containers.

3.2 Vessel Design

Figure 3.4 shows a typical modern 15000 TEU container vessel. The mass of its
steal structure without cargo, ballast water, bunker, and supplies (i.e., the
lightship weight) is 62000 tons". Its deadweight, that is the maximum mass of

1 Weight and mass units are used inconsistently in the maritime industry. Strictly, weight
is a force equal to the mass times the gravitational acceleration. Confusingly, the unit
for mass is often used for both weight and buoyancy forces when calculating stress
forces and moments, even by some loading computers.

53

===PAGE 53===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Figure 3.2: A typical feeder vessel.

Feeder vessels and other smaller container vessels may call ports without
quay cranes. Such vessels need cranes of their own and are called geared
vessels. The crane design can vary, but swinging cranes as shown in Figure 3.3
are common.

Many African ports lack quay cranes and require geared vessels. Geared
vessels have stowage planning challenges of their own. As shown in Figure 3.3,
the cranes have limited height. This means that containers often must be
loaded and discharged in a specific horizontal order in the bays. Such
horizontal overstowage combined with the usual vertical overstowage caused
by the different port of discharge of the containers in the stacks can make
stowage planning of geared vessels particularly hard.

Figure 3.3: A typical geared vessel with swinging cranes to load and discharge containers.

3.2 Vessel Design

Figure 3.4 shows a typical modern 15000 TEU container vessel. The mass of its
steal structure without cargo, ballast water, bunker, and supplies (i.e., the
lightship weight) is 62000 tons". Its deadweight, that is the maximum mass of

1 Weight and mass units are used inconsistently in the maritime industry. Strictly, weight
is a force equal to the mass times the gravitational acceleration. Confusingly, the unit
for mass is often used for both weight and buoyancy forces when calculating stress
forces and moments, even by some loading computers.

53

===PAGE 54===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Figure 3.4: A 15000 TEU container vessel.

cargo that it can carry, is 162000 tons. This gives a maximum total mass of the
vessel of 224000 tons. The vessel can hold 62000 tons of ballast water and
17000 tons of bunker. Hence, the mass of ballast water and fuel can be up to
28% and 7.6% of the total mass of the vessel, respectively. The total mass of a
vessel in some condition is referred to as its displacement, since the vessel
displaces a mass of seawater equal to its own.

Container vessels are equipped with a number of tanks. Some of those are
used for storing bunker and fresh water for the staff, but most of the tanks are
used for ballast water that can be used for better stabilizing the vessel.
Figure 3.5 shows the arrangement of water ballast tanks of the vessel shown
in Figure 3.4. The side tanks are used to adjust the forces acting on the vessel,
keep it levelled, and possibly move the vertical center of gravity up. A few of
these are heeling tanks with automatic pumps to keep the vessel levelled
during load and discharge operations in port. The central tanks are bottom
tanks placed directly under the cargo. They can also be used to adjust the
forces on the vessel and move the center of gravity down. Tanks should ideally
be either full or empty at sea to prevent wear from the strong forces of water
shifts.

To protect the marine ecosystems from invasive species, there are national
and international laws regulating where it is allowed to exchange ballast

Figure 3.5: Arrangement of water ballast tanks.

54

===PAGE 55===
Chapter3 | Vessels

water. In general, vessels should exchange ballast water mid-ocean rather
than near land. In practice this means that ballast water for the departure
condition of a port already must be loaded before calling the port. Most
modern vessels are able to shift ballast water between all tanks.

The position of bunker tanks depends on the design of the vessel. They can be
placed between bays to prevent leakage in case of grounding, but side
positions are also common. Bunker needs to be heated to be liquid. This
means that storage areas close to bunker tanks are warm which may damage
cargo (e.g., melt chocolate).

Lubrication and fresh water tanks are situated near the engine and
accommodation, respectively. Normally, the engine is placed under the
accommodation as for the ship shown Figure 3.4, but most ULCV vessels have
accommodation and engine section split as shown in Figure 3.1.

The cellular structure of the vessel is shown in Figure 3.6. The vessel is divided
into bays that have cells that each can hold one 40’ or two 20’ containers.

Figure 3.7 shows a close-up of the cells in a single midship bay. Cells that can
hold reefer containers are marked with a snowflake symbol. Figure 3.8 is a
picture of a single bay. As depicted, it has an on deck and below deck (or in
hold) storage area. These two areas are divided by metallic watertight
structures called hatch covers.’ A hatch cover can be seen in the picture
dividing the nearest stack on deck with its continuation below deck. The cargo
hold of a bay is normally one big open space, where containers are kept in
place by cell guides at the end walls. The cell guides can be seen in the picture
as a number of vertical lines running from top to bottom of the hold. To stow a
container, the crane must slide it into the two cell guides of the right stack
from the top of the hold. On deck, the containers are placed on the hatch
covers or on the deck itself as is the case for the nearest outermost stack in
the picture. They are secured by lashing rods, which are metal bars connected
to the vessel in one end and a corner post of a container in the other. To

2 There exists vessels without hatch covers and vessels combining general cargo and
containerized cargo. We will not describe these types further here.

55

===PAGE 56===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Hold numbers
21 20 19 18 47 16 15 14 wi2iiw98 765 4321 Tiers
= = fe
E i iE 88
$938
te
20° bay numbers

8177 37005 bi 7 Ba Mas “1 87 8s Mo 75751 M7 “is “bo%5 bi

82 78 74 70 66 62 58 54 50 46 42 38 34 30 26 22 18 14 10 06 02
40’ bay numbers

Rows 221814 100602010509 13 17 21
201612 0604 0307 111519

Figure 3.6: Vessel layout and cell numbering.

increase the stability of container stacks, the rods are often raised from the
deck by a lashing bridge. Lashing bridges are substantial steel structures
running over deck across the ship between each 40’ container bay. The picture
shows two red lashing bridges going two containers high. The lashing rods can
be seen as gray bars lying on the bridges or connected to containers.

As shown in Figure 3.6, the cell positions form a grid structure. Cell positions
are identified using a three dimensional index system. The bay number is the
first index of a cell position. The second index is called row, which indicates
the transversal position. The last index, identifies the vertical positioning and
is called tier. Given a value for the bay, row and tier, it is possible to identify
any cell position on a vessel.

56

===PAGE 57===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Rows
22 20 18 16 14 12 1008 06 04 02 01030507 09 11 13 15 17 19 21

«Figure 3.7: Close-up of the
cells in a single midship
bay (aft view). Reefer cells
are marked with a snow-
flake symbol. The thick
horizontal red line indicates
the position of the lashing
bridge.

» Figure 3.8: Bay structure
(photo Rune M. Jensen,
2010)

57

===PAGE 58===
Chapter3 | Vessels

The indexing system follows specific rules. If a cell holds a 40’ container, we
know exactly where to stow it. On the other hand, if it holds a 20’ container, we
need more information, since a cell can hold two 20’ containers. For that
reason, we distinguish between the 20’ position toward the bow (FORE) and
towards the stern (AFT). A fore or an aft position of a cell is referred to asa
slot. The identification of slots follows a simple numbering convention. Cell
positions regarding a 40’ container use even bay numbers, while odd numbers
are used for the 20’ slots. Hence, the position row 3, tier 86, bay 10 refers to an
40’ cell. The equivalent for a 20’ slot would be: row 3, tier 86 and bay 9 for the
FORE position and bay 11 for the AFT position.

Another convention is that row indices start from the middle and assign odd
numbers toward starboard and even numbers toward port (as in a theatre). If
the number of rows is odd, the center row is given index 00. Tier indices only
use even numbers and cell positions above deck normally starts from index 82
(72 on newer vessels). An exception to this rule is for bays that do not have cell
positions below deck (e.g. bays near the stern), in which case the indexing may
start from 80.

A bay plan usually marks certain slots as reefer slots. In Figure 3.7, reefer slots
are marked with a snowflake symbol in tiers on and below deck. This marking
is an approximation to the truth. A mark normally indicates the position of a
power plug on the vessel, but it is not required that the power plug connects a
reefer container in the slot. Using an extension cable, it may be possible to
connect a reefer container further away. It is not common, though, to exploit
this flexibility in stowage planning. A valid stowage plan usually requires that a
reefer container is placed ina reefer slot.

3.3 Seaworthiness Requirements

To be legal and insurable, a container vessel must be classified according to
the regulations of a classification society. The largest classification societies
today are DNV GL, Bureau Veritas, American Bureau of Shipping, Nippon Kaiji
Kyokai, and Lloyd’s Register. They appeared in the 18th and 19th centuries
mainly to assess risk of ensuring vessel voyages, but have today developed
into defining general seaworthiness requirements.

58

===PAGE 59===
Chapter3 | Vessels

For a vessel to leave port, it must be deemed seaworthy according to its
classification society. In general, all items loaded must be distributed along
the vessel such that the transversal stability is acceptable and the stresses
on the vessel structure are within limits.

Consider Figure 3.9. The displacement determines the portion of the hull that
is under water. The water line is the horizontal line, where the water meets the
hull and the plane that cuts the hull at the water line is called water plane. The
design waterline of a vessel is the water line at the point where the vessel is
loaded at its full capacity.

The vertical line intersecting the forward surface of the stem (most forward
part of the vessel), with the design waterline is known as the fore perpendicu-
lar, while the aft perpendicular is the vertical line drawn, where the design
waterline intersects the aft side of the rudder post. The mid point between aft
and fore perpendicular is known as midship (see Figure 3.9).

Aft Fore
Perpendicular Midship Perpendicular
1 ' 1

= Waterline

Figure 3.9: Position of perpendicular and midship in a container vessel.

Draft is the distance between the keel (bottom of the vessel) and the water line,
and can be calculated at any point of the vessel. When calculated at the
perpendiculars, it is called Fore and Aft draft, respectively. There are three
requirements for the draft at the perpendiculars. First, the aft draft of a
container vessel must be high enough for the propeller to be submerged under
water. Second, when calling into a port, the maximum of aft and fore draft must
be smaller than the allowed draft at the port to avoid the keel hitting the
bottom. Third, the maximum draft must be high enough to allow port cranes to
work properly.

59

===PAGE 60===
Chapter3 | Vessels

The trim of a vessel is defined as the difference between its aft and fore draft.
When the trim is negative the vessel is trimmed by the bow (i.e., nose down),
and when the trim is positive the vessel is trimmed by the stern. Trim and draft
play an important role in fuel consumption. Draft increases as a consequence
of an increment in the vessel displacement. The heavier the vessel gets, the
faster the engine must go to keep up the speed. With respect to trim, the vessel
often should be trimmed slightly by the bow to achieve its optimal trim; that is,
a trim where, due to the shape of the hull, sailing of the vessel will be as
efficient as possible.

The curves in Figure 3.10 are made by the TROP module of the MACS3 loading
computer [33]. They show the engine power saving in percent as a function of
trim for a typical stowage condition of a 15000 TEU vessel at 18 knots. The blue
curve shows the effect of changing the trim by only re-arranging the longi-
tudinal weight distribution of cargo, while the green curve shows the effect of
keeping the cargo arrangement fixed, but adding ballast water to get the
desired trim. As depicted, the optimal trim is -2 meters in both cases, but since
the ballast water increases the draft of the vessel, it only achieves a 3 percent
power saving while re-arranging cargo alone can give a 6 percent power saving.

Power saving (%)

4 Figure 3.10: Power saving as
a function of optimal trim,
achieved by ballast water
(green curve) and cargo
(blue curve) [33].

4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3
Trim (m)

The example gives a good impression of the potential savings that a stowage
planner can achieve by trimming the vessel with cargo rather than ballast
water.

60

===PAGE 61===
Chapter3 | Vessels

In practice, this is difficult within a region, where the vessel is half empty and
the main objective of the longitudinal placement of cargo is to maximize crane
utilization in future ports. For that reason, stowage plans for the short legs
within a region often rely on ballast water to get an acceptable trim. What is
really important is to build up a proper final weight distribution of cargo for the
departure condition of the last port in the region, where the vessel’s next
journey is a long leg. Ideally, the stowage plan for this port should enable the
vessel to be trimmed to zero with a small amount of ballast water required for
piloting out of the port. The vessel then discharges this ballast water at sea to
achieve optimal trim (e.g., a slight trim by the bow) with cargo alone.

3.3.1 Transversal Stability

The center of gravity (G), of a container vessel is the point, where the sum of
gravitational forces may be taken to act. The center of buoyancy (B), is the
center of gravity of the water displaced by the vessel, and it is where the sum
of buoyancy forces can be taken to act. When the vessel has no list, as
depicted in Figure 3.11(a), G and B are aligned with the center line (a straight
line midway of the vessel). When an external force causes the vessel to heel,
the center of buoyancy moves in the heeling direction to B, as shown in Figure
3.11(b). The intersection between a vertical line through B, and the center line
is called the metacenter M . M is constant for small inclinations, since the
movement of the buoyancy is linear with the area of the submerged wedge,
which in turn approximately is linear with the inclination angle 6. The righting

Center line

M M
Waterline

(a) (b)

Figure 3.11: Transversal view of a vessel at even keel (a) and a vessel perturbed by an external heeling
force (b).

61

===PAGE 62===
Chapter3 | Vessels

moment is linear with the GZ distance (see Figure 3.11(b)), which is equal to
GM sin(@), where GM is the distance between G and M and is called the
metacentric height. In other words, the higher metacentric height of the vessel,
the higher transversal stability.

A minimum GM of 0.6-1m is normally required. If G is high above the keel, it
may move faster towards the side of inclination than B, and the vessel
capsizes. To avoid this, vessels are designed with a much higher weight
capacity per volume below deck than on deck (nearly twice as high in many
cases). In practice this means that cargo with high weight density like 20’
containers are preferred to stow below deck. GM can be further increased by
stowing heavy containers at bottom tiers and fill bottom water ballast tanks.

Empty vessels and vessels with large beam (Post-Panamax or larger vessels)
have high GM (sometimes more than 15m) causing them to be stiff with high
acceleration forces. Here we often try to move G upwards by stowing heavy
containers high in hold. Another approach is to leave some water ballast tanks
half full even though this will cause extra wear on the tanks. The effect in each
tank is a smaller wedge, moving mass in the direction of the inclination and in
this way counteracting the righting moment. This free surface moment (FSM)
can be calculated as a reduction in GM. The corrected GM is referred to

as GM’.

Feeder vessels and other smaller vessels often are challenged by meeting the
GM minimum and often cannot be made seaworthy without using ballast water
in bottom tanks.

For large inclination angles (typically more than 60 degrees), the water meets
the deck and the righting moment decreases drastically. If a vessel lists due to
uneven weight distribution over the center line, this situation occurs at smaller
angles. For that reason, a seaworthy vessel must be at even keel (i.e., no list).

3.3.2 Stress Forces

Consider a vessel floating in hydrostatic equilibrium on a calm water surface.
Two main static forces constantly act on the structure of the vessel in

62

===PAGE 63===
Chapter3 | Vessels

opposite directions. One is the gravity force acting downwards. The other is
acting upwards and is the buoyancy force, caused by the water displaced by
the submerged part of the hull. These two forces, both with the same
magnitude, are not uniformly distributed along the vessel. For instance, let us
assume that a vessel is divided in longitudinal sections that are independent
and can move vertically, as Figure 3.12 shows, and that each section weighs
differently. Their weights depend on what has been loaded in the section and
the weight of the vessel structure in the section. Sections with downward
arrows weigh more than the buoyancy they provide, and sink deeper into the
water until the amount of displaced water equals the section’s weight. In
sections with upward arrows, the weight is smaller than the buoyancy, and
they raise until the amount of water displaced matches the section’s weight.
Vessels, however, are not divided into independent sections and this causes
counteracting stress forces in their steal structure.

There are seaworthiness requirements for three kinds of stress forces ona
container vessel: shear force (SF), bending moment (BM), and torsion moment
(TM). Each of these stress forces can be calculated at any point along the
vessel. Assume that we want to compute SF, BM, and TM for the point
indicated by the diamond in Figure 3.12.

The shear force is the sum of forces acting fore of the point and expresses to
what extend the acting forces want to cut the vessel vertically in that point.
We could alternatively have defined the shear force to be the sum of forces aft
of the point. This would give an equally large force in the opposite direction as
the resulting vertical force acting on the vessel is zero (otherwise it is not in
hydrostatic rest but would move up or down in the water).

Figure 3.12: Example of the effects of uneven distribution of weights and buoyancy forces along dif-
ferent sections of a container vessel.

63

===PAGE 64===
Chapter3 | Vessels

The bending moment is also computed by summing the forces acting fore of
the point, but this time, we multiply each force with the length of the arm to it.
Strictly, we need to solve an integral to compute the bending moment
accurately. Loading computers approximate this result by dividing the vessel
into sections as shown in Figure 3.12. The bending moment expresses to what
degree the acting forces try to flex the vessel in that point. Again, the bending
moment computed in the same way aft of the point, would give an equal
moment, but in the opposite direction (otherwise the resulting longitudinal
moment acting on the vessel is not zero and it would move to a higher or lower
trim).

Like most ships, container vessels "hangs” in the ends. That is, their buoyancy
force is higher than their weight in the middle and vice versa in the ends. This
gives the typical shear force and bending moment curves shown in Figure 3.13.

The shear force and bending moment must be within seaworthiness limits
computed at certain points over the vessel called frames. Depending on the
steal structure, the limits may be different in positive and negative direction.
There are different limits for sea and port conditions. As depicted, bending
moment is highest in the center of the vessel, where the “hanging” forces try
to flex it maximally. This can be counteracted by placing heavy cargo midship
and fill the midship ballast tanks. From a stowage planning point of view,
bending moment can be critical in the first port of a region. This port is often a
discharge only port and if cargo for this port mainly is placed in the center of
the vessel, the result may be a final condition after discharge with too high
bending moments. Bending moment is often also critical in the last port in the
region, since there often is limited free space on the vessel that may not fit the
weight of the cargo to load.

To understand torsion moment, we need a top view of the vessel. Assume that
we want to compute the torsion moment in the point indicated by the diamond
in Figure 3.14. As for bending moment, torsion moment is the sum of forces
fore of the point, where each force is multiplied with an arm, but this time the
length of the arm is the transversal distance to the center line. The longitudinal
distance from the point to each acting force is irrelevant. The torsion moment
expresses how much the acting forces try twist the vessel in the point. Again

64

===PAGE 65===
Chapter3 | Vessels

> Figure 3.13: Shear force
(blue) and bending moment
(brown) graph with frame
point limits. Screenshot from
MACS3 loading computer
(used with permission from
Navis Software, part of
Cargotec ©, Finland Oy).

65

===PAGE 66===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Figure 3.14: Top view of vessel. Black circles indicate resulting downward forces with a certain dis-
tance to the center line.

we can compute torsion moment aft of the point and would get the same value
but with opposite sign (otherwise the resulting transversal moment on the
vessel would not be zero, and it would roll to a higher or lower list).

A bay with cargo stowed in just one side can cause torsion limits to be broken.
Side ballast tanks can be used to counteract this, but as shown in Figure 3.5
these tanks are seldom aligned with bays and may cause torsion issues in
adjacent bays. Due to this, stowage planners try to stow the same port of
discharge in the wings of the bays (paired block stowage) as shown in Figure
4.21.

Notice that all stress forces are calculated based on the assumption that the
vessel is floating in hydrostatic equilibrium on a calm sea. The actual dynamic
forces on the vessel when sailing through waves are of course much higher.
For instance, consider the increased bending moment when the crest of a
large wave is midship. This fact is taken into account when determining the
stress force limits.

3.3.3 Line of Sight

Cargo and fixed structures may obscure the field of vision from the bridge. A
seaworthy vessel must fulfil the line of sight (LOS) rules defined by IMO. Here
we describe the essentials of the SOLAS rules that apply to most container
ships [40].

According to these rules, the view of the sea surface from the bridge must not
be obscured by more than two ship lengths, or 500 m, whichever is less under
all conditions of draft, trim and deck cargo. The rule is illustrated in Figure
3.15. For most container vessels, it is the 500m restriction that applies.

66

===PAGE 67===
Chapter3 | Vessels

2 ship lengths or 500 m

(whichever is less)
A

~—!__ Waterline

Figure 3.15: The main SOLAR line of sight rule.

However, the rules are not as clear cut as they first appear. It is possible to
load containers above the line of sight, without contravening the rules, so long
as the total blind sector (when viewed from the bridge) does not exceed 10
degrees within an arc of 10 degrees either side of the center line.

The main challenge from a stowage planning point of view is that the LOS rules
reduce the volume capacity of forward bays as shown in Figure 3.16.

The number of killed slots due to LOS depends on the draft of the vessel. The
higher the bridge is over the water surface, the more slots are killed due toa
steeper LOS. Interestingly, this gives a race between bunker consumption and
vessel capacity. In some situations, it may pay-off to increase the draft of the
vessel to free slots killed by LOS even if this leads to higher fuel cost.

It is tempting to solve the problem by trimming the vessel by the bow. This may
even be the optimal trim and achievable by cargo alone. Unfortunately this
means that the vessel will brake LOS at the critical piloting phase in the port,
where it must be trimmed to zero.

Amore sophisticated approach is to take advantage of deflection. Since the
vessel will have more weight than buoyancy in the fore and aft parts, it bends
slightly down in the ends. This bending may be enough to free slots that
otherwise would be killed by LOS.

Figure 3.16: Loss of volume in forward bays due to LOS rule.

67

===PAGE 68===
Chapter3 | Vessels

3.4 Slot Planning

So far in this chapter, we have discussed stowage planning practices related
to global seaworthiness requirements. In this section, we take a more local
view and describe stowage rules and preferences of slot planning, i.e.
assigning containers to slots ina bay.

3.4.1 Below Deck

As described above, the cargo hold below deck of a bay is often one large open
space. In the center bays, the space is close to box formed as shown in Figure
3.7, but fore and aft of the vessel it follows the V-shape of the hull. Figure 3.17
shows a typical arrangement of cells in hold of a fore bay. The bay has four
hatch covers drawn as rectangular beams. In reality, the middle section of a
hatch cover may be thicker leading to reduced stack height of cells below this

part.
SS
4 Figure 3.17: Typical arrange-
ment of cells in a fore hold.

Odd Slots

Due to the narrowing shape of the vessel or installations like engine and
accommodation, some cells may only have their aft or fore slot available for
stowage. For example, as shown in Figure 3.18, it is not uncommon that an
outer bottom cell in fore holds only allows stowage of a single 20’ container in
its aft slot. We refer to such cells as odd slots. Odd slots are a source of
complexity in stowage planning. They must hold a 20’ container before any 40’
containers can be stowed in the stack. In case of few available 20’ containers,
this may be a challenge.

68

===PAGE 69===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Bay

Aft Fore ]

» Figure 3.18: Sideview of fore !
part of vessel showing an

_ [

Cell Guides

As described above, containers in hold are kept transversally in place by cell
guides. Figure 3.19 shows a typical arrangement of containers in cell guides.
The top of the cell guides have structures to help the crane driver align the
container with the cell guides. Containers simply rest on top of each other and
are vertically only held together by the force of gravity. Notice the height
difference between DC and HC containers. It happens that containers get
stuck during load and discharge if they are misaligned with the cell guides.

- Deck line

» Figure 3.19: Aft view of two
container stacks showing
a stowage arrangement in
cell guides.

69

===PAGE 70===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Figure 3.20 shows a top view of two container stacks in hold. The foundation
sockets at the end walls next to the cell guides have cones sticking into the
corner posts of the bottom container in the stack. These are the only resting
points for a stack of 40’ containers as shown for the bottom stack in the
figure. The middle foundation sockets are flat metal plates called mid-bay
guides. They do not have cones as these would damage a 40’ container stowed
there. Instead they have a small metal wall in the longitudinal direction
supporting the containers in the transversal direction. 20’ containers rest on
these center plates as shown for the top stack in the figure.

Mid-bay WN Nes /

ST

Bottom sockets 40°

Cell guide

Figure 3.20: Top view showing the foundation sockets in hold for two cells.

It is possible to top-off a stack of 20’ containers with 40’ containers. In this
case all the weight of the 40’ containers and half of the weight of the 20’
containers rest on the four end wall sockets of the stack, while half the weight
of the 20’ containers rest on the center plates. Luckily, the end wall sockets
usually have much higher weight limit than the center sockets, due to better
steal support at the end walls.

There exists vessels with 20’ and 45’ distance between cell guides, but the
arrangement described above is by far the most frequent.

Permissible Stack Weight

Another issue below deck is the so called permissible stack weight (PSW) for
20’ containers. PSW is due to the fact that the transversal support of 20’
stacks is limited. On older vessels, the 20’ containers simply rest on top of

70

===PAGE 71===
Chapter3 | Vessels

each other. Consider again the left stack with two tiers of 20’ containers
shown in Figure 3.19. The 20’ containers in the first tier are well supported
transversally by a mid-bay guide, but the second tier of 20’ containers has no
direct transversal support. This is a problem when the vessel is at sea. The
transverse accelerations caused by waves will try to push the containers to
the side in the middle part as shown in Figure 3.21. The movement causes
compression of the 20’ containers. The permissible stack weight limit ensures
that these compression forces are within the structural limits of the

containers.

Figure 3.21: Assume that a rolling movement of the vessel causes the red acceleration forces to act
‘on the 20’ containers. The transversal acceleration causes the blue compression forces and other
stresses in the 20’ containers.

From a stowage planning perspective, it is possible to reduce these negative
forces in a number of ways:

= On modern vessels, it is normal to use stacking cones (see figure 3.22)
between 20’ containers that help holding them transversally in place. The
stacking cone shown in the figure introduces a small vertical gap between
containers. Designs without gap also exist.

| i

» Figure 3.22: Hanging stack-
er or stacking cone used to
hold containers transver-
sally in place in hold.

71

===PAGE 72===
Chapter3 | Vessels

m_ If stacking cones are used, a 20’ container is transversally stabilized by
being topped off by one or more 40’ containers as shown in Figure 3.23.

Deck line

Figure 3.23: An example of using stacking cones when stowing 20’ containers below deck (sideview).

The loading computer usually calculates PSW limits for each stack that must
be satisfied for the vessel to be seaworthy according to its classification
regulations. PSW limits depend on the transverse accelerations which in turn
depend on the height of the stack, rolling angle, the metacentric height, vessel
speed, and vessel draft.

It is normal to stow 40’ containers in the outermost stacks of a block of 20°
containers. In Figure 3.19, there is a 40’ stack to the right of the 20’ stack.
Such 40’ stacks cannot prevent the 20’ containers from shifting, but they may
prevent the 20’ containers from actually falling out of the stacks and hit the
bottom of the hold which can be very dangerous.

Stowage Objectives

The primary stowage planning objective below deck is to maximize the volume
utilization. If we only load DC containers, this would simply amount to load a

72

===PAGE 73===
Chapter3 | Vessels

container into each slot. Most services unfortunately have a large fraction of
HC containers (60% is not uncommon). Since HC containers are one foot higher
than DC containers, they take up more than one slot in the height dimension.
Stacks below deck often have some free height between the top of the last
slot and the hatch cover. This may allow a few HCs to be loaded in the stack
without reducing its total number of slots. A mix of DC and HC containers in a
stack with the maximum number of such HC containers is called a perfect HC/
DC-mix. In many cases, though, it is necessary to stow more HC containers in
an area below deck than can be accommodated by a perfect HC/DC-mix in its
stacks. In such cases, one or more deep stacks are translated into pure HC
stacks. This will get the HCs loaded at the expense of one or more DC slots. We
choose deep stacks, since the number of killed slots is likely to be lower than
in shallow stacks.

Another major objective below deck is to utilize the high weight capacity for
heavy 20’ containers. It is important to get these containers below deck, as
they tend to kill capacity of other containers on deck. The heaviest 20’
containers are preferred in shallow side stacks. The reason is that these
stacks often have a higher 20’ weight capacity relative to the deep center
stacks.

The transversal weight distribution below deck should be symmetric over the
center line to reduce torsion.

Reefer containers are very important to load due to their high yield. It may be
necessary to break HC/DC-mix or weight distribution to get them on board.
Most vessels do not have reefer plugs below deck to avoid the extra ventilation
needed when reefers are place in hold. On reefer heavy services, however, it
may be necessary. It is common to place reefer plugs below deck in bottom
tiers as shown in Figure 3.7.

Specials like OOG and DG containers are also high priority cargo that is
important to load. Like reefer containers, they may break other stowage
preferences like HC/DC-mix and weight distribution. The placement of DG
containers is described in detail in Section 3.4.3. OOG containers seldom allow
containers to be stowed above them and thus must be placed on top of stacks.

73

===PAGE 74===
Chapter3 | Vessels

The supporting stack below an OOG container can be volume optimized by
pushing in as many HC containers as possible without the highest point of the
OOG touching the hatch cover.

Figure 3.24 shows how the stowage preferences described above plays
together in a typical stowage situation. The bay is similar to the one shown in
Figure 3.7 with reefer plugs in two tiers close to the bottom below deck. The
two outermost stacks (row 20 and 19) have 10 slots, while the 18 inner stacks
have 11 slots. Notice that the top slot is higher than a DC, due to free space
between the top of the slot and the bottom of the hatch cover. Also notice that
the shape of the hatch covers give extra free space in some stacks. Due to
this, the perfect HC/DC-mix has three HCs in the outermost stacks and two
HCs in the inner stacks.

In this example, we assume that we need to slot plan the wings and the port
center of the bay. The volume utilization is perfect in all rows except 02 and 11.

Hatch cover

Tiers

Rows 20 18 16 14 12 10 08 06 04 02 01 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17 19

in 20D¢ | 20RF Bi ope in 40ORF [| 40HC [J 4OHR (jy 006

Figure 3.24: Aft view of a typical stowage pattern below deck.

74

===PAGE 75===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Row 02 is an example of a pure HC stack, where 2 DC slots have been killed to
accommodate HCs. Row 11 is a so-called dirty stack with a suboptimal HC/
DC-mix. It may be impossible to avoid a dirty stack as in this case due to the
total number of HCs and DCs to stow in the area. In this example, the HC
containers are mainly placed in the top tiers. This is not important. For
instance if a better vertical weight distribution can be achieved by placing the
lower in the stack, this should be done.

The HC/DC-mix below 00G containers is optimal in the sense that any excess
space between the top of the OOGs and the hatch covers has been used by
mixing in HC containers (in this case, a single HC container in row 16). Also
notice that the over-dimension parts of the OOGs have been planned such that
they share the space of a slot in row 14.

The 20’ containers have been placed in outer stacks to utilize the relative high
weight capacity of the stacks. Due to PSW limits, in this case, they can only go
five tiers high and they are all topped off by 40’ containers. Row 12 and 11 hold
no 20’ containers to provide additional side way support to avoid the problem
shown in Figure 3.21. If many heavy 20’ containers were assigned to the bay, it
may have paid of to sacrifice perfect HC/DC-mix in some stacks, since the
heavy 20’ containers would kill even more slots on deck.

The reefer containers have been grouped in this example, but could have been
placed differently (e.g., to achieve better weight distribution). The weight
distribution of this partial stow is approximately symmetric over the center
line. Some torsion will be incurred due to the empty starboard center. Fora
large vessel like the one in this example, the vertical weight order probably
should be to stow heavy containers high to reduce GM.

75

===PAGE 76===
Chapter3 | Vessels

3.4.2 On Deck

There exists open top or hatchless container vessels without hatch covers. On
these ships, cell guides continue on deck to simplify the lashing. The vessel
class is rare, due to additional IMO requirements for minimum pump capacity
to drain rain and sea water that enter the hold. Moreover, the high cell guides
increase discharging and loading times.

The usual arrangement on deck is that containers are secured with twistlocks
and lashings. Containers within each stack above deck are fastened together
with twistlocks. Compared with a stacking cone that can resist a horizontal
force, a twistlock can also resist a vertical force trying to pull the corner
castings of the two containers it connects apart. Figure 3.25 shows a
twistlock.

» Figure 3.25: semi-auto-
matic twistlock. The lock
is released by pulling the
orange handle.

Before loading a container on the vessel, a twistlock is placed in each corner
castings by workers in the pier as shown in Figure 3.26(a). When placing the
container at the top of a stack on the ship, the twistlocks will automatcally
lock into the corner fittings of the top container (see Figure 3.26(b)).

The bottom corners of each base container are locked to the deck, hatch cover
or pedestal with a twistlock. As shown in Figure 3.27, if no more than two tiers
are stowed on deck, no further securing than twistlocks is normally necessary.
Depending on the weight of the containers, it may be possible to stow three
tiers secured by twistlocks alone (except empties that can go 10 or 11 high).
The limitation of a twistlock-only stow is often the racking strength of the
containers. For stows of more than three containers high, lashing rods are
fitted to provide additional racking strength [45].

76

===PAGE 77===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Figure 3.26: Twistlocks are fitted before loading the container (a) and locks into the corner castings of

the top container when loaded (b).

Hatch cover

Figure 3.27: Containers secured by twistlocks. Usually for two tiers only.

Lashing Systems

The first lashing systems were fitted vertically to resist tipping, but it soon
became clear that it is more effective to arrange the lashings diagonally, so
that the container and the lashings work together to resist racking [45].
Lashing rods are always fitted tight and kept tight during the journey.

The usual arrangement is to fit one tier of lashings, placed diagonally within
the width of the container, with the tops of the lashing rods placed in the

77

===PAGE 78===
Chapter3 | Vessels

bottom corner castings of the second tier containers (see Figure 3.28(a)) [45].
This is called cross-lashing. The strength of this lashing can be further
improved by parallel lashing (see Figure 3.28(b)) and upper and lower crossed
lashing (see Figure 3.28(c)) [45].

me.

(a) (b) (c) (d)

Figure 3.28: Internal lashing arrangements: crossed lashing (a), parallel lashing (b), and upper and
lower lashing (c). (d) External lashing arrangement.

Figure 3.29 shows a typical stowage of three tiers of containers over deck with
and without parallel lashings. Notice that all containers are connected by
twistlocks and that extra lashing are added on the outboard stacks due to
wind forces.

There is normally no lashing between adjacent stacks. This is no coincidence,
as it eases loading and unloading of containers. An alternative arrangement,
with the lashing rods located outside of the width of the container, is called
external lashing (see Figure 3.28(d)). This is often used for high stacks which
are lashed from a lashing bridge.

Atwo tier high lashing bridge with an internal lashing arrangement is shown in

Figure 3.30. Notice that the outboard stacks rest partly on a lashing bridge
socket and on a hatch cover. This is a typical situation.

78

===PAGE 79===
ih ws
w, ww = = —

AS JN JN VAN Hate cover
am - Deck line
Figure 3.30: Lashing stowage arrangement on a two tier lashing bridge.


===PAGE 80===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Modern container vessels may have lashing bridges that are up to four tiers
high. From a stowage planning perspective, high lashing bridges may be tricky
to deal with. It may be necessary to build a stack more than four tiers high to
get enough lashing strength to hold its weight.

In addition to the lashing rods described above, lashing bridges often have
lower lashing rods to reduce transversal movement of stacks. The effect of
lower lashing rods is limited and often they are not used in practice. Figure
3.31 shows a typical arrangement of upper and lover lashing rods connected to
the lashing bridge for lashing 20’, 40DC, 40HC and 45’ containers. Notice that
lashing rods for 45’ containers are connected to their 40’ fittings. Also notice
that for a 40’ bay, 45’ and longer containers must be stowed above the lashing
bridge to accommodate their extra length.

» Figure 3.31:Upper and
lower lashing rods of the
lashing bridge.

20'/40' DC stack 40’ HC stack

Lower lashing

Lashing systems are tailor made for a vessel class. They may include
innovative ideas such as vertical wind lashing, where vertical lashing rods on
outboard stacks are used to improve their weight capacity. The lashing system
of a vessel is described in its cargo securing manual (CSM). The CSM is a long
and detailed document defining which kind of containers can be stowed in the
bays of the vessel and how to secure the containers with hanging stackers,
twistlocks, and lashing bars.

Some CSMs have restrictions on the mix of HC and DC containers in tiers below

the lashing bridge in order to connect its lashing rods properly. An example of
such a restriction could be that at least one HC container should be stowed in

80

===PAGE 81===
Chapter3 | Vessels

these tiers. Often it is possible to design vessels such that no CSM restrictions
are necessary.

Lashing Forces

Lashing rods, twistlocks, and containers only have limited physical strength.
When the vessel moves in the sea, container stacks on deck are affected by
substantial acceleration forces that may bring the complete system close to
its structural limits.

Each classification society publishes how to calculate these lashing forces

and determine whether they lie within the limits of the securing system. The
calculations are based on complex mechanical models that break down the

forces in major dimensions.

While these models are outside the scope of this book, a simple example from
an actual regulation [50], gives an impression of the calculations. In the
example, illustrated in Figure 3.32, two 20DC containers are stowed on top of
each other and secured by twistlocks. The example does not include lashing
rods, but it is still necessary to determine whether the forces acting on the
stowage are within structural limits of the containers, twistlocks, and deck
sockets. The calculations are based on the parameters shown in Table 3.1.

4 Figure 3.32: The five main
force components acting
‘on two 20DC containers.

81

===PAGE 82===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Mass of both containers
» Table 3.1: Parameters to
compute lashing forces.

Resultant transversal acceleration
Resultant vertical acceleration

Resultant longitudinal acceleration
Roll angle

Wind force

The calculations include 11 mechanical formulas. We refer the reader to [50]
for details. The objective of the calculations are to compute the five main force
components explained in Table 3.2 and shown in Figure 3.32.

The maximum transversal racking force acting on the
> Table 3.2: Lashing force bottom container.

components. The maximum longitudinal racking force acting on the
bottom container.

The maximum vertical compression force acting on the
bottom container.

The maximum reactive push force acting on the bottom
deck socket.

The maximum reactive pull force acting on the bottom
deck socket.

The first two components S,; and S,, have to do with the strength of the
containers in terms of their ability to be pushed in the transversal and
longitudinal direction by the bottom sockets. Since these forces are strongest
for the bottom container, they are computed for this container. The third
component P, also has to do with the structural strength of the containers. It
is the compression force acting on the bottom container caused by the weight
of the top container and the vertical accelerations. The last two components
P,, and P,, are related to the strength of the bottom deck sockets. They are the
push and pull force caused by the two containers resting on them.

The results of the calculations are shown in Table 3.3
The results show that the forces lie within the limits required by the

regulations. Given that a twistlock type is used that is approved for a 95.8 kN
pull regulations. Since P;, is negative, the corner is subject to pulling of the

82

===PAGE 83===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Force Value (kN) | Permissible value (kN)

> Table 3.3: Results

Sst 130.88 150

of the lashing force

calculation. Ss1 56.40 75
Po 318.40 715
Peo -95.80
Pst 209.50 635

base. Therefore, a twistlock that is approved for 95.8 kN pulling force must be
used.

The lashing forces are calculated by the loading computer of the vessel
according to its class. The main parameters for this computation are:

a lashing pattern,

= metacentric height (GM),
= draft,

m= vessel speed,

= wind speed,

= rollangle, and

= route.

Vessel speed, wind speed, and roll angle often have default values for the
class. The route is determined by the service (e.g., a Transatlantic service can
have tighter lashing limits than an Asia-Euro service due to expected rougher
sea on this route). GM and draft can be calculated by the loading computer for
the given condition or set by the user. For an incomplete stowage plan, it is
practical for the stowage planner to set these parameters manually to the
expected value of the final condition. In this way, lashing force calculations of
finished stacks in the incomplete plan will be calculated correctly according to
the final departure condition for which they must be within limits. The lashing
pattern refers to how the containers are lashed (e.g., with or without parallel
lashing). The vessel typically has a metal plate mounted at each bay
describing the lashing pattern to use for that bay. Ultimately, the chief officer
is responsible for securing the cargo and choose which bays to lash and which
only to secure by twistlocks.

83

===PAGE 84===
Chapter3 | Vessels

GM is the most important of the above parameters, since it is directly linked to
the magnitude of the moment counteracting a tilt of the vessel.

Given a stowage condition, the above parameters, and a large number of fixed
parameters defining physical dimensions of the vessel and lashing gear, the
loading computer calculates the lashing forces. Figure 3.33 shows a subset of
these calculations for a bay of a vessel.

As depicted, the calculations are based on a GM of 12.03 m, draft of 8.84 m,
speed of 15.0 knots, a roll angle of 15.8 degrees, and a wind speed of 30.0 m/s.
The columns show the on deck stacks of the bay (with left/right arrows
indicating port or starboard corner posts). The rows show tiers grouped into:
compression force of fore corner post, lifting force in aft corner post, and

=
|e |o18 Be |>16

370

116
38 283 (283 21.09
1098 3651
aw 631
3073 087
5278
5869

Figure 3.33: A screenshot of a subset of the lashing force calculations of the MACS3 loading com-
puter [33] (used with permission from Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Fintand Oy).

84

===PAGE 85===
Chapter3 | Vessels

lifting force in fore corner post. All forces are measured in tons (strictly it
should be Newton). The right scrollbar gives an impression of the number of
additional force calculations. All red marked numbers exceed the limits. Thus,
stack 16 and 22 have lasing errors. A bay view in a stowage tool normally
summarises these results into a single number per row, which is the maximum
violation in percent of any lashing limit associated with the row.

Weight Distributions that Fulfil Lashing Requirements

Heavy containers can only be placed in the first few tiers on deck to stay
within lashing limits. Due to the rolling movement of the vessel, the
acceleration forces grow with the tier height. Coupled with the limited
securing of containers at top tiers on deck, these tiers can only hold light
laden containers or empty containers.

Figure 3.34(a) and (b) show two examples of stowage configurations that fulfil
lashing requirements. Each example considers two stacks, where the right
stack is assumed to be an outboard stack. The condition in Figure 3.34(a) is
"lashed out” in the sense that the top four slots are killed because any
additional container will cause lashing violations. The condition in Figure
3.34(b) has a weight distribution that allows all slots to be utilized within
lashing limits. In both cases, the outboard stack has less lashable weight
capacity due to its exposure to wind forces.

4 Figure 3.34: Two examples
of weight distributions for
a partially full (a) and a full
stack (b) that are within
lashing force limits.

85

===PAGE 86===
Chapter3 | Vessels

From a stowage planning perspective, it is important to keep the departure
condition in the last port in the region in mind. In the turn port, where the
vessel is least loaded, GM may be high, but as the vessel fills up in the region,
GM decreases, which possibly increases the lashable weight capacity of
stacks. For that reason, it may be a good idea to plan to top-off loaded stacks
in later ports (e.g., the example shown in Figure 3.34(a) may accommodate
more containers in later ports with lower GM).

Foundation Arrangements

The most frequent arrangement of foundation sockets below deck is to have
40’ between cell guides such that a cell can hold either one 40’ container or two
20’ containers. On deck, we often find a higher variety of socket arrangements
even on the same vessel. Figure 3.35 shows four typical arrangements. Notice
that all examples show sockets on two hatch covers, where one stack rests on
both covers. This is a little unusual since this stack then overstows all
containers below both hatch covers and not just one of them.

Figure 3.35(b) shows an arrangement allowing only 40’ containers, while

Figure 3.35(c) shows an arrangement allowing either 40’ or 45’ containers (such
45’ bays usually also allow 20’ containers to be stowed). Figure 3.35(d) shows
the typical socket arrangement found below deck, where 20’ containers can be
overstowed by 40’ containers in a stack. On deck, this is known as Russian
stowage or mixed stowage. Figure 3.35(a) shows the typical alternative, which is
called non-Russian stowage.

Russian versus Non-Russian Stowage

From a stowage planning perspective, non-Russian stowage is substantially
more restrictive than Russian stowage. This is due to the fact that 20’
containers are placed such in non-Russian stacks that it is physically
impossible to stow 40’ containers on top of them.

Figure 3.36(a) shows the position of 20’ and 40’ containers in Russian stacks.
The stowage planner must start by loading 20’ containers in these stacks, but
can at any time shift to 40’ containers. In non-Russian stacks, on the other
hand, the stack can either only load 20’ containers (Figure 3.36(b)) or 40’
containers (Figure 3.36(c)).

86

===PAGE 87===
Chapter3 | Vessels

(a)

(c)

Figure 3.35: Four typical socket arrangements on deck.

(a) Russian bay

SS SS

(b) 20" non-Russian bay (c) 40’ non-Russian bay

Figure 3.36: The position of 20° and 40’ containers in Russian (a) and non-Russian stowage (b) and (c).

87

===PAGE 88===
Chapter3 | Vessels

In practice this makes a big difference. If stowing 20’ containers in
non-Russian stacks on deck, these stacks needs to be pure 20’ stacks. This is
a problem aft and mid-ship, since the high stacks in these parts of the vessel
require very light 20’ containers to avoid killing slots at the top of stacks. For
this reason, 20’ containers are preferred below deck or in the fore part on deck
of non-Russian vessels.

Another issue is that 20’ containers in non-Russian stacks often are secured
with lashing bars between them in the center part that must be re-tightened
at sea. For that reason the crew must have access to the narrow space
between the 20’ containers which often only is possible, if the 20’ stacks are
placed side-by-side in the outmost stacks as shown in Figure 3.37(a). If the
20’ stacks are blocked by 40’ stacks in each end as shown in Figure 3.37(b)
there is no way for the crew to access the lashing bars.

Stowage of 20’ containers in Russian stacks, however, can also be challenging.
Hatch covers are lifted by the quay crane just like containers. For this purpose,
there are special foundation sockets with 20’ separation on hatch covers as
shown in Figure 3.38 (they can also have 40’ separation).

No access

Access No access
(a) (b)
Figure 3.37: 20’ containers in non-Russian stacks must be placed in outboard rows (a) to allow crew

access to re-tighten lashing bars. If such 20° stacks are blocked by 40’ stacks, access is impossible
(b).

88

===PAGE 89===
Chapter3 | Vessels

4 Figure 3.38: Hatch cover
foundation sockets with 20°
separation used by the quay
crane spreader to lift the
hatch cover.

To be within the maximum lift weight of quay cranes, hatch covers are fairly
light structures causing foundation sockets for 20’ containers placed at their
center to be relatively weak. This can cause deflection when placing 20’
containers on hatch covers such that they bend downwards as illustrated in
Figure 3.39. If the deflection is too high, the distance between the outer
sockets of the 20’ containers is reduced so much that the twist locks attached
to a 40’ container are too misaligned to be inserted into the sockets (as shown
by the red circles in the figure).

In practice this means that there may be a limit to how many tiers of 20’
containers a Russian stack can hold, if it is to be topped-off by 40’ containers.

Figure 3.39: Hatch cover deflection (exagerated) making it impossible to overstow 20’ containers with
40’ containers in Russsian stowage as indicated by the red circles.

89

===PAGE 90===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Stowage Objectives

The overall stowage planning objective on deck is also to maximize volume
utilization. Below deck, this objective translates into an ideal HC/DC mix for
each stack. On deck there also exists an ideal HC/DC mix in fore stacks, where
LOS defines a maximum stack height. Other stacks on deck have no defined
maximum height. Instead, the stacks run out of various capacities and if one
of these capacities is exhausted prematurely, it leads to slots of the nominal
capacity being killed.

An obvious example is to exhaust the weight capacity of a stack before all its
slots are utilized. Since most planning tools compute the remaining weight
capacity of stacks between each planning activity, this is relatively easy to
detect and avoid. It is much more challenging not to run out of lashing
capacity. Even within the weight capacity of a stack, a bad weight distribution
of the containers in lower tiers of a stack will make it impossible to stow the
top tiers without causing lashing errors. This is a particular issue if the stack
is supposed to be topped-off in a later port. The stowage planner now also has
to take the expected GM of that port into account to estimate how many
additional containers can be stowed there without causing lashing errors.

Slots can also be killed due to the dependencies between the container types.
Placing a 40’ container in the bottom tier of a stack kills all its 20’ capacity.
Similarly placing a 20’ container in a non-Russian stack will kill all its 40’ and
45’ capacity. Finally, placing a 45’ container in a stack will kill 20’ and 40°
capacity of slots above.

HC/DC mix plays a minor role on deck. In the mid-ship and aft bays with high
stacks on deck, the main impact of an HC container is that it raises containers
stowed on top of it one foot, which leads to stronger lashing forces compared
to a DC container.

Specials like reefer, OOG, and DG containers again take priority to volume
optimization. Reefer plugs are normally placed in bottom tiers and even if the
reefer containers are very light and cause a bad weight distribution for
lashing, they must be loaded. Figure 3.40 shows a typical stowage pattern on
deck.

90

===PAGE 91===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Recall that since 20’ containers are relatively heavy, we prefer to stow them
below deck or in the fore part of the vessel, where the 20’ stack capacity per
slot is higher than in the mid and aft parts of the vessel. If we do have to stow
20’ containers in the high stacks in these parts of the vessel, the stowage
pattern is highly dependent on whether the stacks are Russian or non-Russian
stowed.

The port and starboard side of the bay in Figure 3.40 show typical 20’ stowage
patterns for Russian and non-Russian stowage, respectively. For Russian
stowage, we can at any tier shift from 20’ to 40’ containers. This gives a
preference for stowing 20’ containers consolidated horizontally in the bottom
tiers. For non-Russian stowage, a stack is stowed either solely with 20’
containers or with 40’ and 45’ containers. To avoid killing slots, this means that
we have to make very high pure 20’ stacks. This is very difficult without
causing lashing errors. It is not a coincident that these pure 20’ stacks start

Russian stowage Non-Russian stowage
Rows

22 20 18 16 14 12 10 08 06 04 02 01 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21
Tiers ee
100 Cr ee ee

beto tet t—d
98 porobo toro
bebe tet tnd
96 orororourog
betet+- 4-4-4
94 Cr ee |
beto tet tnd
92 Horotorouos

bate tet tnd

90 porororouog
- - bete-t- 4-4-4
88 Cr ee |
bette t—d

86

' gt gl gl gl gl

82

in 20D¢ | 20RF | 40D¢/40HC in 4ORF/40HR i” 45° oO 006

Figure 3.40: Aft view of a typical stowage pattern on deck. The port (even rows) and starboard (odd
rows) patterns are for Russian and non-Russian stowage, respectively. The thick red horizontal line
between tier 84 and 86 indicates the position of the lashing bridge.

91


===PAGE 92===
Chapter3 | Vessels

from the outboard rows. In this way, the 20’ stacks will not be trapped
between 40’ stacks as shown in Figure 3.37(b) such that the crew is unable to
access their lashing bars.

Reefer containers are preferred on deck since they need ventilation to cool
properly. They should be grouped together and it can be a good idea to avoid
reefers in stacks facing an unused area (i.e., row 02 and 11) in Figure 3.40. The
reason for this is that reefers are spark generators that must be separated
from DG containers of certain IMDG classes. Thus, the reefer free stacks serve
as protective walls that allow future DGs to be placed in the unused area.

45’ containers are preferred to be stowed in 45’ bays, i.e. bays with 45’
between the lashing bridges, which allow 45’ containers to be stowed from the
bottom tier. Otherwise, the 45’ containers only fit above the lashing bridge.
Since no 20’ or 40’ containers can be stowed on top of 45’ containers, they
should be placed high in the stacks to avoid killing slots. 45’ containers should
be clustered for the sake of proper lashing. If external lashing is used, there
should be the same HC/DC-mix under the 45’ containers such that the bottom
45’ containers are in the same height. Otherwise, the external lashing bars
cannot be physically fitted.

On deck, OOG containers often need to be protected by stacks of ordinary
containers on the side (row 12 and 20 in Figure 3.40). Since they kill slots above
them, they should be placed high in the stacks, but not more than one to two
tiers over the lashing bridge such that the lashings of the OOGs can be
checked at sea. High stacks, like the ones shown in the figure, are not suitable
for OOG containers, since they kill too many slots. Instead OOG on deck
preferably are placed in shallower stacks in the fore part of the vessel.

3.4.3 Dangerous Goods (DG)

Recall from Section 2.2.14 that a DG container is a container of any type that
contains hazardous or noxious substances according to the IMDG classes
shown in Table 2.2.

92

===PAGE 93===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Document of Compliance (DOC)

DG containers can only be placed in bays where their class is allowed
according to the document of compliance of the vessel (DOC). Table 3.4 shows
an example of a fictional DOC. Each row of the table corresponds to one or
more IMDG classes, possibly subdivided into flash point (FP) temperature
groups. The flash point is important since it defines at which temperature
vapours from the substance will ignite, given an ignition source such as a
spark from a reefer cooling unit. Each column is an on deck or below deck
(hold) section that can contain DG containers. In this example, this is the case
for the first six bays both on deck and below, while bay 70 only can contain
DGs on deck. Each cell is marked with whether the IMDG class is allowed in
some form (packaged goods allowed (P), Packaged goods and bulk goods
allowed (a), only bulk goods allowed (b), not allowed (X)). Notice that the
restrictions are more relaxed on deck than below.

Segregation of DG Containers

In addition to the DOC restrictions, DG containers must be stowed according to
the segregation rules of the classes. The four major segregation rules are
described below between closed DG containers (the rules are more strict when
open DG containers like open top containers are involved). The complete set of
rules are found in [55).

1 "Away from”
Closed DG containers with IMDG classes that must be segregated
according to this rule can be stowed unrestricted.

2 "Separated from”
Closed DG containers with IMDG classes that must be segregated
according to this rule must be separated by one container both in the
longitudinal and transversal (athwartships) direction. This also affects
stacks in adjacent bays not divided by a bulk head or less than 2.44 m
apart. The rule is illustrated in Figure 3.42.

93

===PAGE 94===
Chapter3 | Vessels

DOCUMENT OF COMPLIANCE NO : PRSO/DFO/01234567891234
Name of ship: CPH Container
BV REGISTER : 012345X

Hold 1 2 3 4 5 6 ondeck | ondeck
Class 1-6 bay 70
11-1.6 x x x x x x P P
148 P P P P Pp P Pp Pp
24 P(ab) P(ab) P(ab) x x x P P
22 P P Pp P Pp Pp Pp Pp
2.3 P(b) P(b) P(b) P(b) P(b) P(b) P P
3 P(ab) P(ab) P(ab) x x x Pp Pp
FP< 23 °Cc.c.
3 P
23°C <= FP<=
61°C c.c.
4) P
4.2 P
4.3 P
5. P
5.2 P
6.1 liquids Pp
6.1 liquids P
FP< 23 °Cc.c.
6.1 liquids P
23 °C <= FP <=
61°Cc.c.
6.1 solids P
8 liquids Pp
8 liquids P(ab) P(ab) P(ab) P(ab) P
FP< 23 °Cc.c.
8 liquids P(b) P(b) P(b) P(b) P
23 °C <= FP <=
61°Cc.c.
8 solids P P P P P
9 P(b) P(b) P(b) P(b) P

P indicates PACKAGED GOODS PERMITTED

a indicates PACKAGED and BULK GOODS ALLOWED
b indicates BULK GOODS only

X indicates NOT ALLOWED

Table 3.4: Example of a document of compliance.

94

===PAGE 95===
Chapter3 | Vessels

2]

“Separated from”
Side view Transversal view Top view, deck Top view, hold

==
=

Horizontally Vertically
On deck Under deck

One container space
or one bulkhead

Longitudinally | One container space Not in the same vertical

line unless segregated
Transversally | One container space One container space by a deck

Figure 3.42: The "Separated from” DG segregation rule. Red indicates that placement is disallowed wrt.
the black reference DG container [55].

3 "Separated by a complete compartment or hold from”
Closed DG containers with IMDG classes that must be segregated
according to this rule must be separated as shown in Figure 3.43.

“Separated by a complete compartment or hold from”

Side view Transversal view Top view deck Top view hold

=
—
Horizontally Vertically
On deck Under deck
Longitudinally | One container space One bulkhead Not in the same vertical
line unless segregated
Transversally | Two container spaces One bulkhead by a deck

Figure 3.43: The "Separated by a complete compartment or hold from” DG segregation rule. Red indi-
cates that placement is disallowed wrt. the black reference DG container [55].

4 "Separated longitudinally by an intervening complete compartment or
hold from”
Closed DG containers with IMDG classes that must be segregated
according to this rule must be separated as shown in Figure 3.44.

95

===PAGE 96===
Chapter3 | Vessels

“Separated longitudinally by an intervening complete compartment or hold from”

On deck
Side view Transversal view Top view deck Top view hold
24m
Under deck
Side view Transversal view Top view deck

| Horizontally Vertically

On deck Under deck

Rainerirrieaal vedere One bulkhead and

Lontudaly | Gtancetootaly unm 24m |
Transversally Prohibited Prohibited

*Containers not less than 6 metres from intervening bulkhead

Figure 3.44: The "Separated by a complete compartment or hold from” DG segregation rule. Red indi-
cates that placement is disallowed wrt. the black reference DG container [55].

Figure 3.45 shows a table defining the segregation rules between the different
IMDG classes. The numbers in the figure refers to the segregation rules
defined above. Blue indicates that there only is a segregation restriction if the
dangerous goods list associated with the DG container says so. Explosives
have special segregation rules marked with gray, which are not described
further here.

Practical Stowage of DG Containers

DG containers must be stowed according to the DOC and their segregation
rules described above. In addition to these rules, there may be special
company rules, like only stowing DG containers on deck, which must be
fulfilled.

96

===PAGE 97===
Chapter3 | Vessels

Explosives
Explosives
Explosives
Flammable gases
Non-toxic, non-flammable gases
Toxic gases
Flammable liquids
Flammable solids
Spontaneously combustible
Dangerous when wet
a Be i_| Oxidizing agents
, | | | | ft f Organic peroxides
Toxic substances
| | |_| Infectious substances
r | | 7 f Radioactive material
Corrosive substances
Miscellaneous dangerous goods

[By Segregation may occur

Hy 1- “Away from”

LB 2- “Separated from”

B 3- “Separated by a complete compartment or hold from”

i] 4- “Separated longitudinally by an intervening complete compartment or hold from”
LO Special segregation rules apply due to explosives

Figure 3.45: The segregation rules between IMDG classes [55].

A general principle is to avoid mixing DG and reefer containers. Reefer
containers are spark generators that cannot be stowed next to DG containers
with flammable substances with flash point (FP) less than 23 degrees Celsius.
By mixing such DG containers into reefer slots, the reefer capacity of the
vessel is reduced which may turn out to be unfortunate in later ports, if
unexpected reefers are to be loaded. As usual, the vessel’s capacity should be
protected ("keep the doors open” in the stowage plan). A more structured
approach for stowing DGs in a reefer bay is to keep them on one side of the
vessel in order to minimize the lost reefer slots and separate reefers from
unloaded space with a non-reefer stack as shown in Figure 3.40.

97

===PAGE 98===
Chapter3 | Vessels

General rules of thumb for stowing DG containers have developed over the
years and include:

1. Any DG container that can be stowed below deck should be stowed below
deck. Doing this will free up space on deck for DG units that are potentially
more hazardous but also give the stowage planner more freedom to deal
with reefers, DG and other stowage issues on deck. Inexperienced planners
have a tendency to stow all DG units on deck, simply because they are
frightened of stowing hazardous cargo. This will work fine in the first
couple of ports but, as the vessel fills up, the DG units being loaded in the
later ports will start to spill out into the reefer bays.

2. Try to keep the DG containers in forward bays and accept that DG bays are
likely to have quite mixed PODs. The general idea is to have a “dirty” DG bay
as a place to put all DG units without interfering with reefers or other cargo
operations and, by the time the vessel reaches the last port, the bay will be
full.

3. Follow the port/starboard rules for DG classes shown in Figure 3.46 to
resolve most conflicts.

Port Starboard

23 42 51 52 9 il 214 22 3 41 43 61 8

S$OOo10 0000564)

[LL ________ LL _______,__~____]|

Figure 3.46: Port and starboard rule-of-thumb for placement of DG containers.

3.4.4 Handling Instructions (HIs)

Acontainer to load can have so-called handling instructions (HIs) that specify
where to stow it. HIls can be requested by the customer, but they are not
seaworthiness requirements. For instance, "keep cool” would be an important
handling instruction for a container with chocolate bars and would cause the
container to be stowed below deck (i.e., away from the sun) and away from hot

98

===PAGE 99===
Chapter3 | Vessels

areas caused by bunker fuel heating. Other HIs can be due to company rules
like "away from living quarters” of containers with smelly content such as
animal hides.

There exists many different Hls and there may be slight variations in their
interpretation between the liner shipping companies. Some common examples

are listed in Table 3.5 with the names and meaning used by the MACS3 loading
computer [33]:

The container must be stowed below deck.

Under deck top The container must be stowed below deck and at the top of a stack (i.e.,
no container can be stowed on top of it).

On deck The container must be stowed on deck or on a hatch-cover.

On deck top The container must be stowed on deck and at the top of a stack (i.e.,no
container can be stowed on top of it).

The container must be stowed on deck. Container cannot be stowed in
an outer row (i.e., the container will be protected by adjacent non-empty
stacks).

First tier on deck The container must be stowed in lowest tier on deck.

Second tier on deck The container must be stowed in the second lowest tier on deck.

Top stowage The container must be stowed at the top of a stack (i.e., no container can
be stowed on top of it).

Away from boiler The container can not be stowed in a hot area. Hot areas are predefined
cells on the vessel.

Keep cool The container must be stowed below deck and can not be stowed in a hot
area.

Away from living The container can not be stowed in bays adjacent to the accommodation

quarters of the vessel.

Table 3.5: Examples of handling instructions (HIs).

From a stowage planning perspective, depending on the liner shipping
company, His may be considered hard rules that must be fulfilled by the
stowage plan. Like specials (DG, OOG, and RF containers) they can be tricky to
place and may need special attention.

99


===PAGE 100===
100

===PAGE 101===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

CHAPTER 4

Cargo Forecasts

A stowage plan is a bet on the future. It is an assumption about how many
cranes that downstream ports will assign to the vessel and how much cargo
there will be to load. It is also a bet on the composition of the future cargo: do |
need to make space for a large number of heavy 20’ containers in a few ports
from now?, Can | assume to be able to top-off with empties in last port of
region?, ls there a discharge port only that can make the vessel unstable?, etc.

In this chapter, we first look at why cargo forecasting is so challenging in liner
shipping and present examples of forecasts used by stowage planners. We
then discuss why unreliable cargo forecasts have deep impact on stowage
planning and describe the best practices that stowage planners have
developed over the years to cope with the problem.

4.1 Cargo Forecasting

The stowage planning team is normally not responsible for producing
forecasts, but receives them from a forecasting group or collect the forecast
from a system in the company.

The forecast is based on manual input from local teams, partner input, empty
flow team, and containers already loaded on pre-carriers.

4.1.1 Forecast Formats

Cargo forecasts have no standard format and most liner shipping companies
break down the information they show differently. A typical forecast is a table
that for each downstream port defines different attributes of cargo to load
and discharge in the port. Figure 4.1-4.3 show examples of forecasts used by
three major liner shipping companies (all referred to as "Myline” in the figures).
In these examples, the number of ports included in the forecasts has been
reduced to save space.

101


===PAGE 102===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

The forecast shown in Figure 4.1 covers two load ports Tanjung Pelepas in
Malaysia and Singapore. For each port, the cargo to discharge and load is
divided into OCEAN” cargo (i.e., cargo exported out of the trade region) and
"COSTAL” cargo (i.e., intra coastal cargo to send between ports within the
trade region). This distinction is important as only ocean cargo will be on the
vessel on the ocean leg. Thus, if the service is volume pressed, it is important
not to kill slots in stacks with this cargo. Coastal cargo is normally less
valuable side business, unless it is pre-carrier cargo (e.g., export cargo to be
transshipped within the region). It can be used to fix stability issues of the
vessel and balance crane moves rather than being stowed space efficiently. In
the figure, there is also a row "EXIT” describing the final condition of the
vessel. That is, how much cargo of a particular type that is on the vessel at
departure from the port. In addition, the very first row "ARRIVAL CONDITIONS”,
defines the cargo on board the vessel at arrival in Tanjung Pelepas. There are
five major attribute groups: "FULL”, EMPTY”, "PARTNER1”, "PARTNER2”, and
“TOTAL”. Each group has three attributes: "UNITS”, TEU”, and "TONS”. Units is
the number of containers of the given type; TEU is the 20’ equivalent count of
the containers of the given type; and Tons is the weight in tons of the
containers of the given type. For the attribute groups, Full and Empty denote
laden and empty containers of Myline. In addition, there are containers from
two partners (i.e., other shipping lines with Vessel Sharing Agreements (VSAs)
with Myline), Partner1 and Partner2. It is normal to have less information
about cargo from partners, and for Partner1 and Partner2, we do not
distinguish between full and empty containers. Finally, Total is the sum of the
containers under Full, Empty, Partner1, and Partner2.

The main table is followed by a derived table that summarises the weight
density of cargo in tons per TEU, where cargo is separated into own cargo
(Myline) and all cargo (i.e., including cargo from partners).

Notice that this forecast gives quite limited information about the container
types. For instance, it says nothing about the ratio between 20’, 40’ and 45’
containers, and it does not forecast dangerous cargo, reefer containers, or
highcube containers. Also notice that it does not give detailed information
about the discharge port of the containers to load, only whether the
destination is in the next (ocean) or current region (coastal).

102

===PAGE 103===
Chapter 4 | Cargo Forecasts

z
etme 4A BEE

example. a 5}
BARA RAAE

E

EEEWEGEEWEME
GEE MEBCEWEME
EERE RECREE


===PAGE 104===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

The second forecast example is shown in Figure 4.2. It does not include
partners (maybe because the service is not a part of a VSA), but is much more
detailed on the container types that include: “20DC”, “20RF”, “40DC”, “40RF”,
“45DC” (despite the name, these are high-cube containers), “2OMT” / “40MT” /
“45MT” (20’ / 40’ / 45’ empty containers), and “OOG”. The next two columns,
“Tons” and “TEU”, show the total weight in tons and the total volume in TEU.
The last three columns “Tons Util.”, “TEU Util.”, and “RF Util.” show the utilized
weight, volume, and reefer capacity of the vessel at departure from the port in
percent. For each port, there are three rows, “discharge”, “load”, and “exit”.
The first two define the cargo to discharge and load, while the last defines the
departure condition of the vessel. As in the first forecast example, the first
row defines the arrival condition in the first port. The ports to visit are Gemlik,
Izmir in Turkey and Valencia in Spain. Also notice that the forecast includes the
expected time of arrival (ETA) and departure (ETD) of the vessel for each port.
The column “Status” shows that this forecast format is quite different from
the first example. “Actual” means that the cargo is real in the sense that the
port already has been visited by the vessel and the cargo shown really was
discharged and loaded as shown. “Pending” indicates that this cargo is
pending to happen, that is lies in the future. So the vessel is currently sailing
between the last two ports Izmir and Valencia, and the forecast really only
covers the last port.

The table “Move Count” below the main table is derived from it and shows the
number of quay crane moves broken into: “Full discharge” (number of laden
discharge moves), “MT Dis.” (number of empty discharge moves), “Full load”
(number of laden load moves), “MT Load” (number of empty load moves), and
“Tot. Moves” (total moves). The column “Prof. Moves” is the number of
proforma moves (i.e., number of moves agreed with the port by contract).

“Balance” shows the surplus of deficit between expected moves and proforma
moves, while “Util.” is the utilization in percent of the cranes with respect to

proforma moves.

Notice that this forecast says nothing about the destination of the loaded
containers.

104

===PAGE 105===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

« Figure 4.2: Second forecast
example.

Bi “Beedle ca

i

alr vale oRocR
3

Boo a Co ana oO

gee arrange

:
gi) ERPS ae S8

gl? RS ee

slp |e |p
Hea aaia
et le | ieee
3 a a3 3%
gl la |f4 |EE
geszese55

ge ele £ Eg EE

9

5

105

===PAGE 106===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

The last forecast example is shown in Figure 4.3. In contrast to the two
previous examples, it defines the port of discharge for cargo to load. The
vessel is in Europe and visits Southampton in the UK, Rotterdam in the
Netherlands, Hamburg in Germany, Antwerp in Belgium, and Dunkerque and Le
Havre in France. It then has an Asia long leg (backhaul) to Tanjung Pelepas in
Malaysia, and Yantian, Hongkong, Shanghai, and Ningbo in China. There are
four main tables, where the first is a forecast for the liner shipping company
(Myline), and the three remaining are forecasts for vessel sharing partners on
the service. As usual, the level of detail is higher on own cargo than partner
cargo. For own cargo, the number of 20’ containers (“20’”), 40’ containers
(“40”) and highcube containers (“HC”) are given together with the total weight
of this cargo in tons (“tons”). Compared to the second forecast example,
though, this is still a fairly rough break-down. Also notice that no arrival nor
departure conditions are summarized as well as discharge cargo which makes
it more difficult to assess the utilization of the vessel unless such information
is calculated in other tables. For partners, only volume (“TEU HC”) and weight
in tons (“WGT”) of cargo is given. The volume includes the high-cube factor
(ie., extra volume of high-cube containers). For partners, there are trailing
tables summing the total volume and weight loaded in each port.

4.1.2 Forecast Factors

A forecast is a prediction about the future and therefore uncertain. The more
certain a forecast is, however, the better the liner shipping company can look
into the future and prepare for it. This high business potential makes good
forecasts important to have.

Acargo forecast depends on many factors. We can divide these into external
factors that are decisions and circumstances that the company does not
control and internal factors that the company in principle controls.

External Factors

= Actual Cargo. Actual cargo of a downstream port is cargo that already has
arrived at the terminal and currently is stored in the terminal yard.

106

===PAGE 107===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Beas sig
PERE

Figure 4.3: Third forecast example.

107

===PAGE 108===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

= Bookings. Cargo bookings for a port is all the cargo that customers have
booked through the company’s sales team to ship with the vessel. Some of
these bookings may already be actual cargo, while the remaining cargo still
has not arrived at the terminal. Key clients may have contracts with the
liner shipping company on shipping a specific amount of cargo (e.g., per
year). Spot customers book cargo without such contracts.

= Vessel Sharing Agreements (VSAs). Liner shipping companies create
services that they share with other companies. Each company contributes
with a number of vessels and is in return entitled to capacity (e.g., in terms
of volume and weight) on the other vessels of the service. Each company is
in charge of planning their own vessels. This means that the stowage
planners must plan cargo from partners. The partners on a VSA service
may be in the same alliance, but are nevertheless competitors. For that
reason they want to limit the information that they share with each other.
Often, this means only informing about the POD of their cargo in the
current port. Thus, the forecast with POL and POD information for partners
shown in Figure 4.3 normally is very uncertain for partner cargo.
Unfortunately the tendency is to make larger and larger VSAs, which means
that there exist main Asian-Euro services today where 80% of the cargo is
from partners and thus basically with unknown POD in ports downstream.

= Downfall. Downfall is the final difference between booked cargo and actual
cargo, i.e. cargo that was booked but did not show up at the terminal.
Downfall can be significant up to 50% in some ports. The reason is that
there neither is a fee for booking cargo nor for not showing up with cargo
(even for tendered customers). Thus, customers can without extra cost
book the same cargo on several vessels and leisurely pick the ship that fits
with the time the cargo turns out to be ready for shipment.

a Disruption. Another reason for containers not showing up in ports can be
that feeders or partners are delayed or have other issues delivering the

agreed cargo. It can also be due to the weather.

= Seasonality. The amount and composition of cargo often follow a pattern
over the course of a year. Often there is a fairly constant set of

108

===PAGE 109===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

supplier-consumer relations associated with a port call of a service. If a
port for instance has producers of products like electronics and toys fora
western market, the months leading up to Christmas are high season and
the months after Christmas are low season. Producers of vegetables and
fruits on the other hand follows the harvesting seasons of these products
and so on.

= Economy. When factoring out seasonality there often is a long term trend in
cargo amounts that reflect the impact of the global economy. This factor is
important to take into account when using historical data to predict cargo.

= Competition. Services offer transportation of products to customers and
these products are in free competition. A port has often services from
different liner shipping companies with products that compete with each
other. A change of the competitor’s service or a change in the freight rates
of its products can have immediate and lasting impact on the cargo
amounts on the service it competes with.

= Politics and Force Majeur. New business frame conditions due to e.g.
taxation, union politics, or production laws; or sudden changes like war and
civil unrest may impact the import-export situation of a port in ways that
unfortunately often can be hard to model.

It is hard to predict the impact of external factors on the forecast since they
are uncontrollable. Surprisingly, this can also be the case for internal factors
even though they are controllable.

Internal Factors

= Uptake Management. As described in Section 1.2.3, the objective of the
uptake management team is to control the sale of bookings to maximize
the amount of high yield cargo on the vessels. This activity affects
forecasting. A forecast is normally updated on a daily basis. The stowage
planner can pull a copy and so can the uptake management team. Let’s say
the vessel is two weeks before arriving the last port in Asia and the
forecast currently has below expected amount of cargo for this port. The
planner may conclude that the final amount for that reason will be below

109

===PAGE 110===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

average. The reaction of the uptake management team on the other hand
may be to pay special attention to this vessel and intensify the sale
aggressively. The result may be that the vessel gets above the average
amount of cargo in this port, so that the forecast is misleading. The same
effect may be seen, if the forecast is above average. Now the uptake
management team may pay less attention to this vessel and eventually end
up with below average amount of cargo for the port. In this sense, the
uptake management team’s activities may counteract the forecast
prediction. In an ideal organization, the forecast is shared between the
update management and the stowage planning team. If the uptake
management makes clear what they intend to do commercially, it is
possible for the stowage planning team to get an idea about in which
direction the forecast is moving.

In a clique organisation (see Figure 1.9), where the uptake managers of a
service are co-located with the stowage planners, the uptake managers
can share their plans with the stowage planners and reduce the
uncertainty of the forecasts in this way. However, in a linear organization,
where the two teams may be in different regions and time zones, this
coordination may be more difficult.

= Cargo Flow Management. As described in Section 1.2.3, the cargo flow
management team is in charge of utilizing the capacity on the network.
Normally each service has an ideal fraction of the cargo for each trade like
cargo destined for Africa and Europe. The cargo flow management team is
in charge of hitting these composition targets. An example is Euro-Asia
services that often also carry cargo on the Oceania-Euro-Asia trade. For
several large liner shipping companies, Oceania services connect to the
Euro-Asia services in ports in the Singapore region. These ports then
become major hub-ports and re-distribution ports. For that reason, cargo
flow management often needs to re-route cargo to avoid over-utilizing the
capacity of some services (i.e., flow cargo to free capacity in the network).
Such decisions also affect the forecast. In particular, if many re-routings
happen, the port of discharge may be hard to predict in the forecast. The
discharge port of a container, however, seldom is changed after it is loaded
on board the vessel.

110

===PAGE 111===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

In contrast to uptake management, it is not easy for the company to just
co-locate the cargo flow managers with the stowage planners. The reason
is that cargo flow management deals with flow between major trade
regions rather than being service specific.

= Empty Repositioning. The objective of empty repositioning is to move empty
containers on the global network from places where they are in surplus to
places, where they are in demand. Ideally, this should happen by only using
free capacity in the network.

Thus again, the stowage planner may experience that this activity works
against the forecast prediction. For instance if the forecast shows that the
vessel has free capacity downstream, then the empty repositioning team
may later decide to use more of the vessels capacity for empties, but this
changes the next forecast that the planner gets. Due to the global nature
of such decisions, they often happen far away from the stowage planner in
the organization and may simply appear in a later forecast without
warning.

4.1.3 Cargo Forecasting Methods

High quality forecasts are important to have, but the question is how to make
them. According to Branch Rickey luck is the residue of design”. To design
reliable forecasts, we essentially need to make statistical models of the
factors they depend on. An in-depth coverage of forecasting methods is
outside the scope of this book. Instead, we aim to give some insight about the
problem.

The cargo forecasting problem in liner shipping can be stated as follows:

= Input: a terminal call date of a target service.

= Output: a prediction of the amount of cargo to load for the service in the
terminal broken down into all or some of the attributes: port of discharge

(POD), total TEU, total weight, container types [20’, 40’ 45’, DC, HC, RF], and
operator.

111

===PAGE 112===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

It is a mistake to think that forecasting is purely a matter of computing the
historical average cargo for each call on a service. First, this approach ignores
actuals, i.e., containers to load that already have arrived to the terminal at the
time of making the forecast. Second, it also ignores the current bookings for
the call and expectations about cargo from partners. Together these two
factors probably are the strongest cargo predictors. Third, while seasonality
may be possible to take into account in a reasonable way, long-term business
cycles etc. can be harder to incorporate.

Since bookings and actuals change over time, it is more informative to analyse
the trend of these changes. Figure 4.4 shows an example of a trend curve as
amount of actuals and bookings as a function of the time left to the port call.
In this example, we ignore how the cargo attributes are broken down and just
consider total volume in TEU. The vessel calls the terminal at time zero. At this
point 300 TEU of the booked 365 TEU have arrived at the terminal. The
forecasting problem is really about predicting this trend curve. For instance, if
we were to make a forecast eight days before the vessel calls the terminal,
only a part of the trend curve would be known as shown in Figure 4.5. A
forecasting system should match the trend curve to the bias of historical trend
curves taking into account seasonality (e.g., also match on the month of the

Volume
(TEU)

400

Bookings

-12 -10 8
(days)
Figure 4.4: Trend curve example.

112

===PAGE 113===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Volume

-12 -10 8 6 4 2 0 Time
(days)

Figure 4.5: Forecast based on trend curve.

year) and economic trends (e.g., normalize the curves by factoring it out). The
result would be an expected trend curve for the remaining eight days that
would give a forecast of actual cargo when the vessel calls the terminal.

Standard data mining systems are able to make these computations, but
surprisingly it is seldom that liner shipping companies store enough data to
reconstruct the historical trend curves that the analysis requires.

4.2 Best Practices for Cargo Uncertainty

A stowage plan is never just a plan for the current port. Stowage planning is at
heart a multi-port optimization problem. In fact, if forecasts were predicting
downstream cargo precisely, cargo in the current port would have no special
status. If an allocation of cargo to load in the current port would cause a roll in
a future port, this would be just as bad for business as rolling a container in
the current port.

As seen in this chapter, however, reality is far from this ideal. The stowage
planner is only certain about the cargo to load in the current port. The forecast
gives an idea of what to expect in the future, but the first priority is to load all
the cargo in the current port. The forecast and the planner’s experience with

113

===PAGE 114===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

the service, on the other hand, enables the planner to make a stowage plan
that takes future demands into account.

In this section, we first go through a stowage planning example made with
StowMan [34] that demonstrates how important the activities in future ports
are for the distribution of ports of discharge over the vessel in the current
port. We then discuss several best practices that stowage planners use to
"keep the doors open” in their stowage plans to deal with cargo uncertainty.

4.2.1 Stowage Planning Example

In this example, we consider a vessel that departs Port of Antwerp (BEANR)
and then calls ports numbered 2 to 10 on the port rotation shown in Figure 4.6.
For each port in the rotation, the expected number of cranes available is given
in the third column.

Color Location Cranes
» Figure 4.6: Port rotation.
MACS3 screenshot [33]
(used with permission from
Navis Software, part of
Cargotec,
© Cargotec Finland Oy).

Figure 4.7 shows the bayplan as planned by the stowage planner. Notice that
containers are coloured according to their POD and that the fore section of a
bay is shown above its aft section. A key objective is to ensure that the
available cranes in each port can work efficiently in parallel. Most stowage
tools can compute a so-called crane split for a stowage plan. A crane split
assigns moves to each each crane such that the work is evened out (see

114

===PAGE 115===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

CRESS CF MESEIEN ED
Hos SEE

Figure 4.7: Departure bayplan plan from Port of Antwerp. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission
from Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

115

===PAGE 116===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Chapter 5 for details on terminal efficient stowage plans). In Antwerp there are
a number of ways to achieve a good crane split for each POD, but there are
good reasons for the cargo to be distributed as shown in Figure 4.7. In the
following, we will describe these considerations for each port and also
illustrate the crane split achieved for each port, as this is one of the most
important criteria to fulfil for a given POD distribution. In the following, the
assumption about downstream load and discharge combinations is that cargo
loaded in discharge ports will be loaded back into the positions discharged.

Port 2 Distribution

In Port 2, load volume normally is less than the discharge volume, and as a rule
of thumb the vessel should be seaworthy and able to depart without loading
and use ballast water. By loading for this port in the aft and forward part of
the vessel, the vessel will not suffer from bending problems and the departure
trim will be more or less equal to the arrival trim. The cargo for Port 2 is shown
in Figure 4.8.

The aft part of the vessel is preferred for light cargo for a port primarily
discharging like port 2. As the cargo mix is often a mix of heavy, medium and
light cargo, the medium/heavy cargo for ports discharging are placed in the
fore part of the vessel although not necessarily the foremost bays. Here a
forward position matching the weight of the cargo is preferred.

The required crane split for port 2 is 2. In the example, a 1.8 split is achieved
with the heaviest crane having 14 moves more than crane 2 (see Figure 4.9).
This should be acceptable as crane 2 have to move from bay 50 to bay 66
whereas crane 1 does not need to use time on a move.

116

===PAGE 117===
Chapter 4 | Cargo Forecasts


===PAGE 118===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.9: Crane split of Port 2 discharge cargo. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

118

===PAGE 119===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Port 3 Distribution

Port number 3 is a pure discharge call. The cargo in this case needs to be
distributed on the vessel so that the vessel can sail without loads, and witha
minimum use of ballast water, to sail on even keel, as the next port in the
rotation has a draft restriction. The port 3 discharge cargo distribution is
shown in Figure 4.10

Port 3 requires a crane split of 3, which in this case is not a problem as the

cargo is distributed to a higher crane split, with the longest crane having 111
moves (see Figure 4.11).

119

===PAGE 120===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.10: Port 3 discharge c: bution. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Fil Fi inland Oy).

120

===PAGE 121===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

t

Figure 4.11: Crane split of Port 3 discharge cargo. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

121

===PAGE 122===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Port 4 Distribution

Port number 4 has a draft restriction. In order to arrive and depart, the vessel
should be planned on even keel (no trim allowed). If the vessel arrives on
maximum draft, the loaded weight capacity is the same as the total weight of
discharged containers.

In this case the actual number of containers to load is less than the number of
containers to discharge, but with a higher average weight due to a high number
of heavy 20’ containers to load. In this example the space for the heavy 20’
containers has been reserved in the bays 26, 34 and 46.

Bays 06 and 10 are loaded with cargo for this port, as there are a high number
of DG containers to load as well, and since in Port 7 there will be a high
number of reefer containers to load, it is a good way to separate the DG
containers from the reefers.

The port 4 discharge cargo distribution is shown in Figure 4.12. Port 4 requires
a crane split of 3, which is achieved in this plan as shown in Figure 4.13.

122

===PAGE 123===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.12: Port 4 discharge cargo distribution. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

123

===PAGE 124===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

a
tl
Figure 4.13: Crane split of Port 4 discharge cargo. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

124

===PAGE 125===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Port 5 Distribution

Loading in port 5 is approximately double of the discharge. This means that it
is important to spread the cargo over the ship in order not to create a long
crane when you assume that you will load back into the discharged locations
and need to load adjacent to areas that you have already defined as areas of
activity.

The port 5 discharge cargo distribution is shown in Figure 4.14.

Here there are only 110 discharge moves, but as shown in Figure 4.15, cargo is
split to 3 cranes in order to start loading as fast as possible.

125

===PAGE 126===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.14: Port 5 discharge cargo distribution. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

126

===PAGE 127===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.15: Crane split of Port 5 discharge cargo. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

127

===PAGE 128===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Port 6 Distribution

In port number 6, there will be a large number of light 40’ containers to load.
This is the reason that bays 62 and 66 have been loaded with this POD. Loading
the light 40’ containers here will be beneficial for the trim and bending
moment on the vessel, upon departure from both port 6 and port 7. It is
important to stow the cargo as high as possible in order to reserve space for
loading in the last port 7.

The port 6 discharge cargo distribution is shown in Figure 4.16. As shown in

Figure 4.17, the 386 discharge moves in port 6 are distributed on the required
3 cranes.

128

===PAGE 129===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.16: Port 6 discharge cargo distribution. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

129

===PAGE 130===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

i

Figure 4.17: Crane split of Port 6 discharge cargo. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

130

===PAGE 131===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Port 7 Distribution

Port 7 needs one full bay for loading reefers (for one discharge port). Here bay
30 is reserved by placing cargo there for the reefers, and the plugs on the
hatch covers of bay 42 and 58 will be sufficient to accommodate the
remainder.

The port 7 discharge cargo distribution is shown in Figure 4.18. As shown in
Figure 4.19, 3 cranes are achievable in port 7 with 120 moves per crane.

Remarks

The example shows how carefully a stowage plan is fitted to the expected
activities in future ports. While the cargo amounts are uncertain, draft
restrictions and the number of cranes in downstream ports are well known.
The terminal contracts make clear approximately how many cranes will be
available in each port on the rotation. The stowage planner normally also has a
good idea about the cargo mix in each port both with respect to average
weight, destinations, and container types (like amount of reefers, DG
containers, etc.). The uncertainty mainly has to do with the actual number of
containers in the mix. It may even have to do with whether a port will be visited
at all. If the vessel is getting behind schedule and a port has little cargo, cargo
flow management may decide to omit the port call all together.

131

===PAGE 132===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.18: Port 7 discharge cargo distribution. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with per:
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

132

===PAGE 133===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.19: Crane split of Port 7 discharge cargo. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from
Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

133

===PAGE 134===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

4.2.2 Stow in Vertical Patterns

Uncertainty even with respect to the port rotation has deep impact on
stowage planning practice. Without this uncertainty, the pancake stowage
approach shown in Figure 4.20(a) may just be as good as the vertical approach
shown in Figure 4.20(b).

(a) (b)

Figure 4.20: Horizontal (pancake) stowage approach (a) versus vertical (b).

If we assume the port rotation is Port 1, Port 2, and Port 3, then neither the
pancake nor the vertical stow lead to restows, but the pancake stow is very
inflexible. If Port 1 is omitted for instance, all Port 1 cargo has to be restowed
in Port 2 to reach the Port 2 cargo. This is not the case for the vertical stow,
where the cargo destined for Port 2 is directly accessible. Even if Port 1 is
called, the stowage planner in this port is limited to stow only Port 2 cargo in
the area, since cargo for any later port will become restows in Port 2.

The vertical stow is much more robust to cargo uncertainty. The cranes has
direct access to all the ports of discharge stowed in the area. This means that
the stowage planner at any time can choose to add more cargo for any
destination. In the pancake stow, only the top destination is directly
accessible. The vertical stow also gives the stowage planner the full scope of
options, when cargo is discharged, since the stacks are fully emptied. This for
instance gives the flexibility to stow 20’ containers that must be below all
other container types. In many cases, reefer plugs are at the bottom positions
of stacks, so there may also be an option to accommodate reefer containers.

134

===PAGE 135===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Further, if the area is on deck, only the bottom positions can hold heavy
containers giving the stowage planner a chance to get rid of some of those. In
total, the situation may be so flexible that the planner can deal with some of
the most difficult container types: heavy 20’ reefer containers.

The vertical stowage approach is a good example of the principle of "keeping
the doors open” in the stowage plan. That is, ensure that the stowage plan is
robust to many different paths of future development.

4.2.3 Use Paired Block Stowage

Ports of discharge should be stowed vertically, but mixing ports of discharge
in one storage area is not good for crane utilization. Instead, ideally a bay
should only hold a single port of discharge, but as described in Chapter 5 this
may lead to too few cranes being able to work in parallel in most ports.

The solution that is generally adopted is the stowage pattern shown in Figure
4.21 that we will refer to as paired block stowage. In paired block stowage the
wing blocks hold the same POD. The center block for a vessel with three hatch
covers can possibly hold a different POD than the one in the wings. If the
vessel has four hatch covers as in this example, the two centers may hold
different PODs. In this example, though, the two centers hold the same POD.

Figure 4.21: Paired block stowage example. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from Navis
Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

135

===PAGE 136===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

The idea to stow the same POD in the wings is another example of "keeping the
doors open” in the stow. If we stow different PODs in the wings, a significant
torsion moment is incurred on the vessel in the port where the first wing is
discharged. This puts us into an inflexible situation for the stowage plan in this
port since we now have to choose a stowage plan that ensures that the torsion
moment gets back within nominal limits. When the wings are stowed with the
same POD, both wings are discharged at the same time causing no extra
torsion moment. The problem is further complicated by the fact that ballast
water tanks normally are misaligned with the bays as shown in Figure 3.5 such
that ballast water seldom can be used to remove the torsion moment. Ona
vessel with four hatch covers, the center blocks do not have that much effect
on torsion moment allowing us to stow different PODs here.

Another characteristic of paired block stowage is that the POD over and under
a hatch cover is the same. This is partly to consolidate cargo for better crane
utilization, but mostly to increase the flexibility of the stowage plan. In
particular, we want to minimize the chance of hatch overstowage. Hatch
overstowage can be caused by a single container below a hatch cover that
must be discharged, such that all the containers above the hatch cover must
be restowed in order to remove the hatch cover and reach the container that
must be discharged. The situation is illustrated in Figure 4.22.

» Figure 4.22: Hatch
overstowage example.
All the red containers
must be restowed in order
to discharge the green
container.

136

===PAGE 137===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

4.2.4 Avoid Hydrostatic Extremes

As described in Chapter 3, the hydrostatic parameters include draft, trim, list,
transversal stability (GM), shear force (SF), bending moment (BM) and torsion
moment (TM).

Without ballast water tanks, the cargo would determine all hydrostatic
parameters and make it hard to control seaworthiness of the vessel in future
ports. The ballast water provides a buffer that gives the stowage planner some
freedom to deal with a less ideal weight distribution over the vessel.

In discharge only ports or in ports, where there is a chance of only discharging
cargo (e.g., to leave before a storm is coming up), the stowage planner must
ensure that the vessel is seaworthy after discharging cargo.

In general, as a measure against cargo uncertainty, the stowage planner
should avoid extreme hydrostatic parameters like insufficient GM, or stress
forces close to limits. In this way, the planner adheres to the "keep the doors
open” principle with more flexibility to deal with unexpected cargo
downstream.

4.2.5 Even Out 20’ Containers in Wings

Another example of the principle of "keeping the doors open” in the stowage
plan is to even out the number of 20’ containers in the port and starboard
wings. As an example, this is done for the containers for the blue coloured
destination in Figure 4.21.

The reason for this is the inaccuracy of the weight matching of the terminal.
Recall that the stowage plan determines the type and weight of containers in
the slots to load on the vessel. The terminal must match the type, but normally
has some freedom with respect to matching the weight class of the containers
(e.g., within 1-2 tons). If the number of containers in the port and starboard
wing of a bay is very different (e.g., due to the number of 20’ containers) then
there is a tendency for the weight also to differ significantly even if the total
weight of cargo in the wings was Close to equal in the stowage plan.

137

===PAGE 138===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

The resulting transversal weight difference can cause torsion that can be hard
for the stowage planner to get rid of.

4.2.6 Use Layout Patterns that Fits Certainty

A major objective of stowage planing is to achieve good crane utilization in the
current and future ports.

Stowage planners often think in terms of "islands” of activity, meaning
separated areas along the vessel where there is cargo to load and discharge,
where cranes can work in parallel (i.e., the areas must be separated by at least
one or two empty bays depending on the width of the quay cranes in the
associated port).

For instance, if a planner knows that a future port has four cranes, then the
planner should establish at least four areas of activity before calling the port.
This can be done in different ways, however, depending on the certainty of the
cargo.

Assume that the vessel is at a turn port and is loading the first cargo for some
future port. If the planner is certain about the amount and composition of
cargo to load for this port in the current and intermediate ports, filling one
activity area at a time using full bays may be sufficiently flexible. This
approach is shown in Figure 4.23.

If the cargo to load in later ports for the destination is more uncertain, on the
other hand, a more robust approach is to stow containers in each of the four
activity areas using a small pattern such as a centers and wings as shown in
Figure 4.24.

In this way, even if no more cargo for the port is loaded later, the stowage

planner is still guaranteed a crane split of at least four. If more containers are
received later, the pattern can be grown to full bays as needed.

138

===PAGE 139===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.23: Building up a crane split of four cranes using a full bay stowage pattern. MACS3 screen-
shot [33] (used with permission from Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

139

===PAGE 140===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

Figure 4.24: Building up a crane split of four cranes using a center and wing stowage pattern. MACS3
screenshot [33] (used with permission from Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

140

===PAGE 141===
Chapter4 | Cargo Forecasts

4.2.7 Use Stowage Templates

As the multi-port stowage example shows, the planner should always pay
attention to the future. In particular, it is important to have a strategy for
protecting capacity needed in later ports. If a large number of heavy 20’
containers or reefers are expected, the necessary reefer slots and bottom
space must be available. If many 45’ containers are coming up, a 45’ bay must
be kept clear or the planner must ensure that there are enough free slots
above the lashing bridge to hold them.

The different protected capacities, though, may be threatened by other future
cargo. To test whether the plan is robust, it may be a good idea to test stow
different scenarios. For instance, the amount of bottom space for heavy 20’
that can be kept free depends a lot on the weight distribution of other cargo to
load. The planner should test stow different likely weight compositions to
check that the necessary capacity is sufficiently protected in each case.

One approach that has been used by several liner shipping companies is
template stowage planning. The idea is that experienced planners make an
ideal stowage plan for the vessel in the last port of each visited trade region.
The plans are based on an assumption of expected cargo in the ports. Even
though these template plans seldom can be followed in detail in practice, they
can be a valuable guidance for less experienced planners.

141

===PAGE 142===
142

===PAGE 143===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

CHAPTER 5

Container Terminals

Container terminals and carriers are independent companies that interact
through service contracts.’ For a particular port call, a service contract may
define the berthing time window, the guaranteed number of crane moves
during the call, the maximum number of free restows, and various handling
fees.

It may also specify the type of cranes working on the vessel, but interestingly,
it normally does not specify how the number of cranes may change during the
port stay even though this is important to know for the liner shipping company.
Hence, the terminal can choose to have many cranes working on the vessel in
the beginning of the call and fewer in the end, or any other crane assignment
schedule that ensures the guaranteed number of crane moves in the contract.
As discussed below, the terminal may use this freedom to reduce its own
operational costs.

The liner shipping company typically instructs the terminal about where to
stow the containers to load. A normal procedure is that the stowage planner of
the vessel sends a stowage plan to the terminal 12-24 hours before the
vessel’s expected time of arrival (ETA). Some terminals even accept the plan to
be send when the vessel has arrived.

In this plan, the weight of each container is approximated using weight groups.
The exact weight of a container is only known when it arrives to the terminal.
The terminal in turn substitutes each container in the plan with a real
container of same type and with a weight close to the weight group of the
planned container. The result is send back to the stowage planner for
verification.

It is a major objective of the liner shipping company to minimize the port stay

1 However, if they belong to the same industrial group like APM terminals and Maersk
Line, some coordination of activities may take place.

143

===PAGE 144===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

of a vessel as this means lower port fees and opportunities to catch up on
delays and sail at lower speeds. The terminal, however, does not consider each
line individually, but tries to maximize its overall productivity. It is free to
choose in which order to stow the containers and how many cranes to use. The
objective for the liner shipping company then becomes to pass over a stowage
plan to the terminal that supports its operations such that it will service its
vessels with high productivity. To achieve this, the liner shipping company
must have a detailed understanding of how a stowage plan affects terminal
productivity.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide such an understanding. In Section 5.1,
we first give a general introduction to the layout of terminal yards and the
equipment used to store containers in the yard and stow vessels. Then, in
Section 5.2, we describe the work processes involved in vessel stowage
including the different kinds of crane moves that can be carried out by modern
quay cranes. Finally in Section 5.3, we discuss how to make stowage plans
that support high terminal productivity.

5.1 Terminal Layout and Equipment

Acontainer terminal is an inter-modal hub for the shipment of containers.
Containers can either arrive from the sea side on vessels or barges, or from
the land side on trucks and trains. Within the flow of cargo, we distinguish
between import, export and transshipment containers. They all use the
terminal as temporary storage, but import containers go from sea to land,
export containers go from land to sea, and transshipment containers go from
sea to sea.

The sea side (also called the quay side) and the land side (or hinterland) are the
two access points to the terminal. Within a terminal, the area where
containers are stored is called the yard. The yard is an intermediate area,
where containers are stored during the transaction from sea to land mode (and
vice versa) and during transshipment from ship to ship. Due to logistics issues,
containers are never moved directly from the land to the sea side. Thus,
containers are always stored in the yard at some point during the shipment.

144


===PAGE 145===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

5.1.1 Layout

The yard is organized into a grid pattern of rectangular container storage
areas. A container storage area is called a block or a stack. The size and
orientation of a block depends on the cranes and trucks that operate it. A
typical yard layout for so-called RTG handling systems, where rubber tired
gantry cranes (RTGs) operate blocks and trailer trucks transfer containers
between the yard and the quay, is shown in Figure 5.1. Notice that there
usually are special areas for storing empty containers, reefer containers, and
DG containers. In addition, some terminals are equipped with sheds. Examples
of sheds are packaging centers, container repair centers and reefer cleaning
and testing areas. Movement of containers between the yard and the empty
stacks, or the sheds, are referred to as yard moves.

A storage position in a block can be defined using the same reference system
as a container vessel. In this case, the block is divided into 20’ (odd numbered)
and 40’ (even numbered) bays and a container stored in a block has a row and
tier number. The Port of Tanjung Pelepas (PTP) in Malaysia uses an RTG
handling system and has a layout similar to the one shown in Figure 5.1. Figure
5.2 shows an RTG crane operating a block in PTP. Notice that the block holds

Storage area
DG storage blocks for empty containers Reefer storage blocks
1

Figure 5.1:A classical yard layout.

145

===PAGE 146===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

4 Figure 5.2:A block
operated by an RTG crane
(photo Rune M. Jensen,
2010).

both 20’ and 40’ containers. You can also see the odd 20’ bay numbers written
on the feeder lane running between the block and the leg of the RTG that is
closest to the camera.

5.1.2 Equipment

Yard operations can be carried out by a variety of handling equipment. In
general terms, we can distinguish between vertical and horizontal transports.
Cranes belong to the first category and are used to stow or retrieve containers
from stacks [51].

Yard Equipment

On the yard we normally find Rail Mounted Gantry cranes (RMGs) or Rubber
Tire Gantry cranes (RTGs). The first are installed over a yard block and can only
reach containers within the block, while the RTG cranes can move between
blocks and are thus more flexible. RMG cranes can span over eigth rows of
containers, plus a lane for accessing horizontal transport vehicles. These
cranes can work over stacks that are seven containers high. RMG cranes are
generally wider, up to 12 rows, and can stack up to eight containers. Figure 5.2
shows a typical RTG crane.

146

===PAGE 147===
ChapterS | Container Terminals

Horizontal handling equipment is used to transport containers in the yard and
to and from the quay and land side. We distinguish between two types of
horizontal equipment: active and passive [31]. Passive equipment is not able to
independently lift containers. Examples of passive equipment are trucks and
trailer trucks which need to be serviced by for example an RMG. Semi-
Automated terminals like Container Terminal Altenwerder (CTA) in Hamburg,
Germany also use Automatic Guided Vehicles (AGVs), which are driverless
trucks, mostly used in cooperation with automated RMGs.

Active equipment, on the other hand, has the ability to lift containers directly
from the yard. Examples of active handling equipment are fork lifts, reach
stackers, and straddle carriers. A reach stacker is a vehicle equipped with a
crane arm that can reach containers stacked up to five high. Figure 5.3 shows
a Straddle Carrier (SC). It is a tall vehicle able to drive over and lift containers
from a row stacked up to four high.

Depending on the type of equipment used, terminal handling systems can be

categorized into trailer truck systems, SC systems, RTG systems, RMG
systems, and combination systems [31]. The choice of system is often

> Figure 5.3: A straddle carrier.

147

===PAGE 148===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

dependent on the availability of land, the initial investment, and the cost of
labour.

SC handling systems rely only on one type of equipment for transferring
containers to and from the yard. The fact that an SC can only stack containers
four high requires terminals where enough land is available. Thus, they are
rare in Asia.

RTG handling systems are more space efficient than SC handling systems.
They are used in combination with trailer trucks for the transferring of
containers from the yard to the quay. RTG handling systems are popular and
typically have a yard layout similar to the one shown in Figure 5.1. They are
suitable for some automation.

RMG handling systems require no interchange areas as road vehicles are often
allowed into the terminal area to bring the containers beside the appropriate
row. These systems provide high-density storage, fast operations, and are
easier to automate. Similar to RTG systems, trailer trucks or AGVs are used for
sea to yard transfers.

Quay Equipment

The wharf of a terminal is divided into straight sections. For each section, a
number of large quay cranes are mounted on a single track of rails running
along the wharf. Consequently, the cranes can move to each side on the tracks
but can not pass each other.

A quay crane is used to discharge and load containers to a vessel. A typical
quay crane can lift 60 tons to a height of 60 meters and can reach out to all 23
rows of a modern container vessel. The lifting height of a quay crane over the
deck of a container vessel depends on its type and displacement as well as
the water level in the port. Liner shipping companies may for a particular
vessel and service state this height in terms of the maximum number of
high-cube containers that can be handled on deck. Figure 5.4 shows a side
view drawing of a quay crane. The boom of a crane must be up when a vessel
arrives and must be lifted, when the crane passes the accommodation of a
vessel. A boom lift takes in the order of 20 minutes.

148

===PAGE 149===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

» Figure 5.4: Quay crane.

As shown on the picture of Figure 5.5, containers arrive and leave on trailer
trucks (or SCs/AGVs) on a number of driving lanes between the legs of the
crane. If containers are loaded on deck of the vessel, they must be equipped
with twistlocks by stevedores as illustrated in Figure 3.26, before being lifted

Figure 5.5: Quay crane driving lanes in PTP. Notice the hatch covers placed on the left side of the
crane (photo Rune M. Jensen, 2010).

149

===PAGE 150===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

onto the vessel. Figure 5.6 shows two 20’ containers on a truck ready to be
fitted with twistlocks. The twistlocks are taken from bins located on the
wharf.

Moving a crane from one bay to another is called a crane set. The driving time
is approximately five minutes, but a crane set is still very disruptive. The crane
must be aligned with each bay prior to commencing work, the trailer trucks will
need to be moved to the new location on the quay and re-align with the crane
as well as the twistlock bins and stevedores.

Twinlifting Figure 5.6 shows a twinlift spreader. It is a telescopic spreader that
in the shown position can lift two 20’ containers. There are four orange
retractable twistlocks in the center of the spreader and four fixed twistlocks
in the extreme corner positions of the spreader. Also notice the dark red
guides currently folded up over the fixed twistlocks and at the ends. These
guides are folded down to align the spreader with the containers when picking
them up. When twinlifting, all eight twistlocks are in use. If the 20’ containers

Figure 5.6: Fitting twistlocks to two 20° containers twinlifted with a modern spreader. The four orange
twistlocks in the center of the spreader are retracable and only used in twinlift mode (photo Rune M.
Jensen, 2010).

150

===PAGE 151===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

are loaded into non-Russian stacks, they must be separated. This happens by
moving the arms and the center twistlocks a little outwards and takes
approximately 20 seconds.’ If the quay crane operator wants to lift a single 40’
or 45’ container, the mode of the spreader is changed by lifting the center
twistlocks. This takes approximately 10 seconds. It is important that the
operator remembers to do this as the center twistlocks otherwise will hit the
roof of a 40’ or 45’ container and damage it.

It is also possible to re-configure the spreader to a single lift of a 20’
container. This happens by retracting the arms of the spreader until the
distance between the outer fixed twistlocks is 20’. This takes about 30
seconds. The mode is necessary to use to load and discharge 20’ containers
from odd slots and vessels with fixed 20’ holds. Moreover, this setting is
usually used to lift hatch covers. All mode changes can be controlled remotely
by the quay crane operator.

A quay crane can typically load or discharge 30 containers per hour in single
lift mode. This productivity is reduced to about 25 moves per hour when
twinlifting 20’ containers. The reason is mainly the higher weight load of the
crane, as heavier weight normally slows down the crane. Despite the reduced
number of moves per hour, the crane is moving 50 containers per hour

compared to 30 containers in single lift mode [8].

Some combinations of 20’ containers are not possible to twinlift. The
twinlifting rules are described in detail below [8].

= Two 00G units cannot be twinlifted.
= Two reefer containers cannot be twinlifted.
= Two DG containers cannot be twinlifted.

m= Only DC containers can be twinlifted.

2 Time estimates of spreader configuration changes are based on [12].

151

===PAGE 152===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

m= The combined weight of the twinlifted containers cannot exceed the
maximum weight limit of the quay crane. A weight limit of 60 tons is
normal.

m= The weight difference between the paired containers can not exceed the
maximum weight difference limit of the quay crane (typically about 8 t). For
that reason, it is seldom that empty containers can be paired with laden
containers.

In addition to these rules, it is also important to pair containers for twinlift
that can be efficiently handled by the terminal. We cover this in Section 5.3.1.

Quad lifting and Tandem lifting A tandem spreader is able to tandem lift two
40’ containers side-by-side or quad lift four 20’ containers. It is essentially
made by connecting two twinlift spreaders in parallel. In practice, quad lifting
is challenging for the crane operator due to the increased alignment
complexity of the containers. For that reason quad lifting is still rarely used.

Vertical Multi Lifting Another approach to increase the productivity of quay
cranes is to lift a block of containers connected by twistlocks vertically as
shown in Figure 5.7. Double lifting of laden 20’, 40’, and 45’ containers may be
allowed in some ports given that sufficiently strong twist locks are used to
hold them together. For empty containers, triplelifting may also be allowed.

> Figure 5.7: Vertical double
lifting.

152

===PAGE 153===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

5.2 Terminal Work Processes

Regarding terminal operations, the main objective of the liner shipping
company is to reduce the port stay as this translates into lower port fees and
opportunities for sailing slower between ports and catching up on the
schedule. The port stay can be minimized by 1) reducing the total number of
quay crane moves by avoiding unnecessary restows of containers, and 2) by
maximizing the utilization of quay cranes. The utilization of cranes is
maximized by minimizing the makespan of the cranes or in other words by
distributing the moves along the vessel such that all assigned cranes can work
simultaneously in parallel during the whole port stay. In addition to these
objectives, the liner shipping company must devise stowage plans that are
possible for the terminal to realize efficiently with twinlifts.

This section describes how to make stowage plans that achieve these
objectives. However, before going into the details of this topic, we provide an
overview of terminal management decisions including: berth allocation, yard
management, and crane scheduling.

Berth allocation is the decision of where a vessel should berth. Many container
terminals assign vessels to positions close to where the export containers are
stored. This is done in order to reduce the transport time to and from the quay.
Unfortunately, this strategic plan can not always be followed during daily
operations. The terminal services a number of liners, meaning that more than
one vessel is present at a given time. Arrival delays or processing time of the
ships might hinder a vessel from berthing at the originally planned position.

Yard management concerns the arrangement and movement of containers in
the yard. As previously mentioned, the berthing position is highly dependent
on where the containers to load on a given vessel are stored in the yard. Every
time containers arrive at the terminal, a decision has to be made about where
they should be stored. Depending on the policy in use at the terminal,
containers are usually grouped in blocks depending on the properties of the
containers. Such properties are typically POD, reefer, and DG. Yard policies
often change depending on whether the terminal is land scares or not, or if it is
mainly an import, export, or transshipment terminal.

153

===PAGE 154===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

Quay crane scheduling determines how many cranes should be assigned to the
vessel and in what order they will discharge and load the containers.
Traditionally this operation is divided into smaller parts. First the terminal
assigns cranes to vessels. This decision takes into account the minimum
number of moves defined in the contract, but not only for the current vessel at
hand, but also for the remainder of the vessels that will visit the terminal
during a day. With the cranes assigned, terminal operators decide first on a
rough schedule of the container moves to be performed. For each crane, a
number of bays to be worked on is assigned. This partitioning of the bays is
called a crane split. The time points at which load and discharge operations
commence for each bay is then decided. This is called a quay crane schedule.
Once this rough schedule is ready, the terminal plans the load sequence (load
planning). In practice, the received stowage plan is stripped for all container
identifications and thus only a type-based stowage plan is left. Then terminals
often take the liberty of selecting which containers to stow where in the vessel
while retaining the same type and with a weight within typically 1-5 tons of the
container in the stowage plan.

5.3 Terminal Efficient Stowage Plans

As mentioned As mentioned above, a short port stay is valuable because it
leads to low port fees and opportunities to sail slow or catch up if the ship is
falling behind on its schedule. There are two orthogonal ways to reduce the
port stay:

1. Minimize the total number of crane moves. This can be done in two ways:
a) by avoiding unnecessary cranes moves (i.e., minimize the number of
restows), and b) by making each crane move as efficient as possible. We
cover a) in the next chapter (Section 6.4.1), while b) is discussed in Section
5.3.1 below.

2. Minimize the idle time of cranes assigned to the vessel. This is achieved by

minimizing interference between the assigned cranes as described in
Section 5.3.2.

154

===PAGE 155===
ChapterS | Container Terminals

5.3.1 Optimize Crane Move Cycles

The following subsections describe different ways to organize a stowage plan
such that productivity of each crane move cycle is as high a possible.

Fit Twinlifts to Yard Organization

Since quay cranes have higher performance when twinlifting, it is important
that the stowage planner ensures that many 20’ containers can be twinlifted.
Section 5.1.2 describes a number of rules that twinlifts of 20’ containers must
satisfy. In this section, we extend these hard stowage rules with soft rules to
increase the probability of twinlifting.

= 20’ containers with same POD and final destination (for transshipment
containers) should be paired. It is of course necessary to pair 20’
containers with same POD to be able to twinlift their discharge (unless one
of the containers is a planned restow). The fact that it also is an advantage
to pair the final destination of transshipment containers is due to the
arrangement on the yard. As shown in Figure 5.1, containers with different
connections are placed at different locations in the yard. This means that if
a truck is loaded with two containers with different final destinations, it
has to go to two areas of the yard. This will increase the driving distance
and the unload time of the truck such that more trucks must be assigned to
feed the quay crane compared to a situation, where the twinlifted
containers have the same final destinations. The terminal may not be able
or willing to assign these extra resources to the crane or may even single
lift 20’ containers with unpaired final destination [8]. In both cases, the
crane’s gross moves per hour (GMPH) will decrease. If the crane is the long
crane (i.e., the crane with most moves assigned among the cranes working
on the vessel), this will cause an extended port stay of the vessel.

= Since empty containers are also grouped together in the yard, empty 20’
containers should be paired for the same reasons as 20’ units with same
POD and final destination. However, notice that most pairings of empty and
laden 20’ containers would break the limitation on weight difference
anyway.

155

===PAGE 156===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

Setup Bays for Dual Cycling

The discharge and load operations on a container vessel can be organized by
the terminal in many ways. One approach is to discharge all containers before
starting loading, another is to discharge and load at the same time. Each quay
crane, however, is normally not discharging and loading at the same time. It
will either be set up for carrying out discharge moves or load moves. Fora
discharge move cycle, an empty spreader moves to the vessel, pick up cargo,
and carry the cargo from the vessel to a receiving truck on the pier. The trucks
feeding it, drive in a closed loop from the crane to the yard location, where the
discharged containers must be stored. For a load cycle, it is the opposite way
around. Since the trucks follow different driving patterns when discharging
and loading a bay, there is an overhead of shifting the crane from one mode of
operation to the other. The down side is that the spreader is empty during half
of the cycle.

The idea of dual cycling is to overcome this limitation. It is a third mode of
operation, where each cycle of the crane interleaves a discharge and load
move. In this way the spreader always carry cargo, which in theory should
double its productivity. In practice, though, dual cycling increases the
complexity of yard operations significantly and also needs the bay to be
stowed in a certain way.

A requirement to the stowage plan is that the containers to discharge and load
are of the same length. A bay with a mix of 20’ and 40’ containers is not fit for
dual cycling and neither is a mixture of 20’ and 40’ to load back. The height of
the containers are of less importance. They can be a mix of DC and HC
containers. This significantly constrains the stowage planning as we often
want to mix 20’ and 40’ containers to utilize the capacity (e.g., stack weights)
of the vessel maximally.

The reason for these requirements is not physical. It is in principle possible to
dual cycle a mix of 20’ and 40’ containers. The problem is that the quay crane
operator in this case often must change the mode of the spreader between
single and twinlifting. This causes extra wear and tear of the spreader which
may reduce its service time. In addition, if the operator forgets to change
mode, it may harm equipment and become a safety risk. If the spreader is

156

===PAGE 157===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

used to lift two 20’ containers in 40’ mode, it will only lift the containers in the
four outer twist locks. In other words, each 20’ container will only be lifted in
the ends. While lifting in the hold, where the cell guides hold the 20’ containers
together, it may be possible for the spreader to lift them, but they may also get
stuck. When the spreader gets above the cell guides, the 20’ containers may
bend out and even be dropped on deck causing equipment damage or injure
personnel. If the spreader is used to lift a 40’ container in twinlift mode, the
center twist locks are retracted and may damage the roof of the 40’ container.

Dual cycling can not take place below and on deck at the same time, since the
stacks are separated vertically by the hatch cover. Theoretically, it can be
applied in turn below and on deck, but in practice dual cycling is inefficient on
deck. The reason is that either the stacks of discharge or load containers will
form a barrier that the spreader has to be lifted over. It is also important to
ensure that the crane operator does not confuse load and discharge stacks as
any error will disrupt the dual cycling work process. This is done by separating
the load and discharge stacks by one or two empty rows as shown in

Figure 5.8. In total this means that approximately only 40% of the moves ina

<4 Figure 5.8: Separat-
ing the load and
discharge stacks in
dual cycling.

187

===PAGE 158===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

bay can be dual cycled. Thus, if a bay can be single cycled with 25 moves
per hour (MPH) in average, we can asume that it can be dual cycled with
0.4x50 + 0.6x25 = 35 MPH in average [8].

An advantage of dual cycling is that the transversal balance of the vessel is
maintained since discharge and load moves alternate. On the other hand, the
stowage planner is restricted to plans, where a dual cycled bay is immediately
loaded again in the same terminal. Moreover, dual cycling requires the feeding
trucks to discharge and load a container in each feeding cycle as shown in
Figure 5.9.

For that reason, it normally only pays off for the terminal to do dual cycling if
30-40 or more containers can be dual cycled, and some terminals in particular
terminals with compact yards, may not offer dual cycling at all. Finally, dual
cycling will only shorten the port stay if it reduces the work time of the long
crane [8].

Avoid Unnecessary Hatch Lifts

Hatch covers are designed such that they can be lifted by the spreader of

the quay crane. The crane moves them to the quay. They are typically stacked
behind the crane and away from the driving lanes under it as shown in Figure 5.5.

ke i £4 aBaeoB
LC) = lm BEB

Bes [. Baa
Dual

Baa
ES DE Ez ES B= fea
cycling
operation 15,7,

Single cycling
operation

Figure 5.9: Single and dual cycle truck feeding loops.

158

===PAGE 159===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

The time spent by the crane on moving a hatch cover is subtracted from the
time it spends on moving containers. Moreover, a hatch cover move is normally
2-3 times longer than a container move. For that reason, it is important to
avoid unnecessary hatch cover lifts in a stowage plan.

The question is when a hatch lift is unnecessary. As argued in Chapter 4, the
POD of cargo over and under a hatch cover should be the same. So we normally
do have to discharge containers below a hatch cover, if we are discharging
containers above it.

An exception from this rule is coastal cargo destined for the next port or a few
ports downstream. If we are sure not to omit these ports from the rotation,
they can be stowed on deck with no cargo or cargo to later destinations under
the hatch cover.

Another general approach to minimize the number of hatch lifts is to
consolidate the cargo into fewer bays. But again this also can have negative
consequences such as reducing the crane intensity or increasing the stress
forces on the vessel.

Avoid Manhattan Towers

As described in Chapter 4, due to the uncertainty of cargo in future ports, it is
an advantage to consolidate containers destined for the same port in center
and wing sections of bays (paired block stowage). In practice this means that a
bay with three hatch covers can have two different ports of discharge (PODs)
stowed at the same time (one POD in the center and possibly another in the
wings). For a bay with four hatch covers, up to three PODs can be stowed at the
same time, one in the wings, and possibly two different PODs in the two
centers.

Such blocks of containers on deck for future ports (remain on board (ROB)
cargo) may reduce the efficiency of the quay crane in the current port. If the
ROB cargo is in the center sections of a bay and the crane has to discharge
cargo from the wing section to the seaside, the spreader has to pass the
center block. This gives the spreader a long travel distance, and if the block is
close to maximum height, it also slows down the crane, since the spreader has

159

===PAGE 160===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

to move with minimum clearance over the block as shown in Figure 5.10. Such
blocks on deck that reduce crane productivity are referred to as Manhattan
Towers.

Figure 5.10: Manhattan Towers increase the cycle time of quay cranes.

Some vessels have one outboard stack on deck that does not rest on a hatch
cover. Such stacks often form Manhattan Towers already from 4 high due to
the safety risk [8].

The stowage planner should avoid Manhattan Towers, but this can be difficult
since the utilization of the vessel often must be maximized for export cargo,
and only stowing a single POD per bay typically leads to a too low crane
utilization over the ports in the rotation as discussed in Section 5.3.2.

One approach is to plan for more cranes in each port since this will
compensate for the reduced productivity of each crane due to the Manhattan
Towers even though the utilization of additional cranes in itself can increase
the number of Manhattan Towers [8].

160

===PAGE 161===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

Another issue is that a high GM causes too high lashing forces to reach
maximum stack height on deck when the vessel is most empty at and just
after the turn port. This means that a block sometimes must be topped-off
near the last port in the region, where the GM is lower. Such topping-off can
reduce the crane productivity substantially as the containers to load may be
moved at maximum height, where the spreader can only move slow [8]. The
situation is illustrated in Figure 5.11.

Figure 5.11: Topping-off bays may be time consuming.

5.3.2 Minimize Idle Time of Cranes

The wall clock duration of a sequence of parallel tasks is called the makespan
of the tasks. The makespan of the quay cranes assigned to a vessel is simply
the port stay (if we ignore other berthing operations). By minimizing the idle
time of the cranes, we maximize the number of cranes that can work
simultaneously on the vessel, and in this way we minimize the port stay.

161

===PAGE 162===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

Crane Split

As described in Section 5.2, the terminal decides the crane split of the quay
cranes assigned to a vessel. For each crane, the crane split defines which bays
the crane is going to work on. A number of rules must be satisfied by a crane split:

m= Since the quay cranes of a wharf section are mounted on the same rail
track, they cannot pass each other and they cannot work on the same bay
at the same time. For that reason, a crane split is a division of the bays
following the order of the cranes. The work areas of adjacent cranes can be
partly overlapping, but the cranes must then work in the overlapping areas
at different points in time.

m Since the quay cranes are wider than a single bay, a crane working on one
bay excludes other cranes to work on nearby bays. Usually, the separation
distance between cranes is 40’, which means that at most one crane can
work on any pair of adjacent bays at any point in time. Older cranes can
have a larger separation distance of 80’. In this case, at most one crane can
work on any triple of adjacent bays at any point in time (see Figure 5.12). We
also have to take into account how the crane is positioned relative to the

Total working time

I Crane with highest working time |
rT re |
T t T i

V T T T 1

(a)

Total working time
I Crane with highest working time l

(b)

Figure 5.12: Single crane work areas for 40’ (a) and 80’ (b) separation distances.

162

===PAGE 163===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

bay. So far, we have assumed that it is positioned at the center line of the
bay. But if the crane cannot twinlift 20’, it needs to align with the fore and
aft 20’ stacks of the bay, which means that it takes up more horizontal
space. Hence there may be a special separation distance for 20’ lift
(typically 60).

Figure 5.13 shows a crane split computed by StowMan [34] for three cranes
with green, light brown, and light blue color codes. The table above the vessel
shows the number of discharge (out) and load (in) moves broken up on 20’ fore,
20’ aft, and 40'/45' containers to move. The crane split itself, is shown below
the vessel. It is a crane schedule over time that for this example starts
Wednesday 16:00 and ends Friday 10:00. The total number of crane moves is
shown for each block of work (due to twinlifting, this number may be smaller
than the total number of containers moved). The moves are split into discharge
(up arrow) and load (down arrow) blocks. In this example, each bay is at most
worked on by one crane, but it is easy to imagine a schedule where a bay would
be worked on by different cranes at different periods.

Avalid crane split according to the separation rules alone is not a guarantee of
high performance of the terminal:

a If the workload of the cranes is uneven, some cranes are forced to be idle
while others finish their work. More precisely, the port stay is decided by
the long crane, which is the crane with the largest number of moves.’ The
number of moves that the other cranes make are “shorter” than the long
crane translates into idle time. For the crane split shown in Figure 5.13, the
light brown crane is the long crane and finishes about five hours later than
the other cranes. If some of its moves in bay 42 (e.g., the load moves) were
carried out later by the green crane instead, the port stay may have been
possible to reduce by a couple of hours.

= Ifthe crane split has even workload but the number of bays to work on is
much larger than the number of cranes, then the cranes may waste time

3 Assuming that this is also the crane that takes the longest time to finish.

163

===PAGE 164===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

Figure 5.13: Crane split example. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from Navis Software,
part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

164

===PAGE 165===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

moving between bays and re-aligning with them (i.e., the cranes perform
unnecessary crane sets). A similar situation may occur if the crane split
assigns a crane to work on bays on each side of the accommodation. In this
case, the crane will lose significant time lifting its boom over the
accommodation. The two situations are illustrated in Figure 5.14.

Crane must pass Cranes must move
accomodation between bays

Figure 5.14: Time wasted due to unnecessary boom lifts and crane sets.

If cranes are right next to each other, the feeder trucks can not enter and leave
the driving lanes in the area between the cranes. This can cause congestion as
illustrated in Figure 5.15.

Risk of lane congestion

Figure 5.15: Three cranes right next to each other can cause lane congestion.

Crane Intensity

A service contract usually gives the liner shipping company little direct
influence on the crane split. The carrier, on the other hand, has a large indirect
influence on the crane split, since the terminal will choose a crane split and
schedule of the cranes that has as little idle time as possible to maximize the
utilization of the equipment.

165

===PAGE 166===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

For instance, if the liner shipping company knows that three cranes will work
on the ship, then the stowage plan should have at least three clusters of move
activities along the vessel that satisfy the separation rules described in the
previous section.

In general, the objective of the carrier is to ensure that at least as many
cranes, as the terminal is expected to assign to the vessel, can work in parallel
during the whole port stay without interfering with each other.

Move Based Crane Intensity Calculation Recall that the service contract
usually does not specify the number of cranes that the terminal must assign to
the vessel. Instead, it defines a time window for the call and a guaranteed
number of crane moves during the call. Let t and m denote the size of the time
window in hours and the guaranteed number of crane moves, respectively.
Further, let p denote the maximum productivity of an assigned quay crane
measured in moves per hour. The liner shipping company can then conclude
that the average number of moves per hour during the port stay at least is 7
which means that at least 3 cranes must be assigned to the vessel in average
during the port stay.

The question is how to produce stowage plans that guarantees that the
expected number of cranes can work efficiently. We cannot say how the
terminal will assign the cranes or how many they will use. But due to the
separation distances between cranes, we can estimate the minimum number
of crane moves of the long crane. Recall that for a typical separation distance
of 40’, at most one crane can work on any pair of adjacent bays at any point in
time. For that reason, we can define the minimum number of moves of the long
crane / as the maximum number of total moves for any adjacent pair of bays.
For a separation distance of 80’, | is defined in a similar way, but this time it is
the maximum number of moves for any adjacent triplet of bays. In practice, we
need to compute the total number of moves for all pairs or triplets of adjacent
bays as shown in Figure 5.12 and assign / to the maximum. With m still

denoting the total number of moves, let ci = f.

166

===PAGE 167===
ChapterS5 | Container Terminals

We will refer to this measure as the Crane Intensity (Cl) of the stowage plan.*

Cl gives an upper bound on the number of cranes that can work efficiently in
parallel on the vessel. To see this, first consider that the Cl measure assumes
that each crane carries out | moves. It does not make sense to give each crane
less moves than the long crane as they will then just finish before the long
crane and not contribute to reducing the port stay. On the other hand, we know
that this number of cranes* actually can work in parallel as / is the maximum
number of moves that at most one crane can work on at any given point in
time. A stowage plan where the crane moves are consolidated in a few bays
must necessarily have a low Cl. However, we cannot make the opposite
conclusion. A stowage plan with a low Cl is not necessarily consolidated. It can
still have move activities in many bays, as long as at least one pair of adjacent
bays have much more activity than the rest.

Planned Cl Versus Executed Cl In addition to the stowage planned Cl defined
above, we can talk about the terminal planned Cl and the terminal executed
Cl (8).

The terminal planned Cl is the number of cranes assigned to the vessel in the
load plan made by the terminal. It still represents an expected crane
utilization, but it is more realistic than the stowage planned Cl, because it is
based on substituting containers in the stowage plan with real containers on
the yard and scheduling the order of discharge and load moves. Hence, the
long crane may have to work on more bays than the adjacent pair or triplet
with maximum number of moves that theoretically defined the long crane at
planning time.

The terminal executed Cl simply is the actual number of cranes that were
assigned to the vessel during operation. Compared to the terminal planned Cl,
it includes any operational disruptions or delays (e.g., due to different speeds
of crane operators) [8].

4 Some carriers refer to this measure as the crane split, but we reserve this term to the
actual crane schedule decided by the terminal.

5 Unless the vessel has too few bays to fit them (e.g., a 22 bay vessel can at most fit
11 quay cranes with 40’ separation distance).

167

===PAGE 168===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

Time Based Cl Calculation Move based Cl calculations assume that each type
of move takes the same amount of time. This is not true in practice. The speed

of a crane move depends on the type of move being carried out and whether it
is a load or discharge move. Table 5.1 shows typical crane productivities of
different move types.

Single lift load 27 4 Table 5.1: Typical crane
Single lift discharge 30 oe of different
Twinlift load 24 (i.e. 48 20’ containers)

Twinlift discharge 27 (i.e. 54 20’ containers)

Hatch cover load 15

Hatch cover discharge 12

Dual cycling 18

Vertial twinlift load 15 (i.e. 60 20’ containers)

Vertial twinlift discharge 17 (i.e. 68 20’ containers)

Vertical triplelift (empty) load 12 (i.e. 72 20’ containers)

Vertical triplelift (empty) discharge 14 (i.e. 84 20’ containers)

Tandem lift load 18

Tandem lift discharge 20

The crane productivity of course also depends on the type of the assigned
cranes and how the terminal operates them. Thus, the liner shipping company
must maintain productivity estimates for each terminal visited by a service
and take into account which type of cranes the terminals assign.

The key idea of the time based Cl calculation is to measure work load in terms
of time rather than moves. In this way the difference in productivity between
move types can be taken into account. This results in a more accurate Cl
estimate. That is, a more accurate estimate of the maximum number of cranes
that can work in parallel on the vessel.

Formally, the time based Cl is given by ; = fm, where ¢(m) is the total work
time required for a single crane handling all m moves and ¢(/) is work time for
the | moves of the long crane. The calculation of ¢(m) and ¢(/) should be as
accurate as possible taking all known time components into account.

168

===PAGE 169===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

For a bay this means that it must be considered what fraction of the
containers will be twinlifted, vertical twinlifted, or even dual cycled. These
estimates depends on the operational practices of the terminal as well as the
arrangement of the containers in the bay. The number of hatch covers loaded
and discharged to handle the bay must also be estimated.

Between bays, the crane set time must be added, and in general work shift
and break practices must be included in the time estimates when possible.
The long crane is identified as usual from crane separation distance rules and
work load in each bay. But for the time based Cl, work load is measured in
time, and crane set time and other known idle time due to work shift and
breakes is included.

The approach above for calculating time based Cl does not generalize easily to
situations, where different types of cranes are assigned to the vessel. The
average productivity of the cranes gives the statistical expected Cl, but it may
be more accurate to study how the terminal applies the cranes and model this
in the calculations (e.g., it would be natural to use the most productive cranes
for bays with high work load etc.).

How to Choose a Target Cl for a Single Port

The number of cranes that should be delivered in a stowage plan through the
Cl depends on several factors. Providing a higher Cl than the average number
of cranes that can be expected from the service contract is a natural starting
point [8].

If the stowage planner knows the number of cranes that the terminal will
assign to the vessel, there is no reason to plan a much higher Cl. A higher Cl
means that more bays must hold more than one POD which can lead to
Manhattan Towers slowing down operation as described in Section 5.3.1. A
higher Cl may also mean that moves are spread over more bays leading to
cranes spending more time on moving between bays (crane sets) as described
in Section 5.3.2 [8].

Aterminal, however, will seldom be able to assign as many cranes as the
stowage planned Cl defines. The reason is that this Cl ignores the operational

169

===PAGE 170===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

overhead caused by crane breakdowns, rest periods, gang shifts, stuck
containers, lack of feeding trucks, weather etc. An operational Cl loss of 0.2 to
0.5 is normal, but depends on the terminal. In Europe, US, Middle East, Japan,
Australia, and New Zealand where workers are organized in labour unions, it is
difficult to use equipment flexibly, as deploying an extra crane may be outside
the scope of the agreement with the gang assigned to the vessel. Moreover, if
operations can be done within the berth window of the vessel, the terminal will
hesitate to assign an additional gang to the vessel as this will increase costs.
In regions with less union control (e.g., in China), it often is easier to change
the equipment and resources assigned to the vessel [8].

The terminals may also have Cl preferences. Terminals with well maintained
equipment and well organized work often prefer consolidated bays with low Cl
overhead that allow cranes to have high productivity due to few crane sets and
lack of Manhattan Towers. Such plans, however, are vulnerable to disruptions.
If a crane breaks down and cannot move away or a consolidated bay for other
reasons like a stuck container is blocked, then no cranes can get to this large
fraction of the total work and most likely cannot just start working on another
bay, because the moves are spread over a few bays all being worked on
simultaneously. For that reason, terminals with less stable operation often
prefer plans with a high Cl overhead leaving them space along the vessel to
deal with disruptions [8].

Crane Intensity of a Service

If we consider just a single port, the maximum number of cranes that
physically can work in parallel on the vessel is given by its longitudinal position
of bays. As an example consider a typical 14000 TEU vessel with 21 bays
shown in Figure 5.16.

BBOGGGE BnReRenteceoe

Figure 5.16: A 14000 TEU vessel with 21 bays.

170

===PAGE 171===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

If we assume that the quay cranes have the typical separation distance of 40’,
we get that a crane can work on every second bay. Hence, ignoring the position
of cargo to discharge, the maximum number of cranes that can work in parallel
on the vessel is 11. Since this is a large number compared with the number of
moves that typically has to be carried out in a port, we can in principle achieve
a good crane utilization by consolidating cargo for the port in full bays.

If we look at the service from a multi-port perspective, however, we will in
most cases run out of bays by following this approach. As shown in Figure 5.17,
assume that the vessel has 17 port calls on a rotation from Asia to Europe and
that the total average number of cranes assigned to the vessel over the service

is 85.5.
#Cranes at

©©6© ©©O©GOOEOOOOOOO

Figure 5.17: Cranes asigned to a vessel on an Asia-Europe service example.

On this typical service connecting two trade regions, a bay will hold two
different PODs during a rotation: in the first region, it holds containers toa
POD in the second region. In this POD, containers for a POD in the first region
is loaded and so on. Since we have 21 bays and each bay will be worked on two
times during the rotation, our approach can at most accommodate 42 cranes
during a rotation which is far from the 85.5 that are available.

A solution is to use paired block stowage, as discussed in Section 4.2.3. In this
way we can load up to 2 different PODs per bay as shown in Figure 5.18. This
means that we can accommodate 84 cranes on the rotation, which is almost
enough for the 85.5 being available.

1s} 2]2]4]5]6]7] 3 J 2 sofss]:2[13}:4] 15/16] 7] 15f19}a9]

BEBOGREO BOESeeneoee

Figure 5.18: Splitting bays into two ports of discharge accommodates more ports and cranes.

171

===PAGE 172===
Chapter5 | Container Terminals

Our analysis shows that paired block stowage may bring us to the limit of
efficient crane utilization. If more ports are to be visited, we may have to break
the paired block stowage principle and stow more than two PODs in some bays
{8}.

172

===PAGE 173===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

CHAPTER 6

Stowage Planning
Process

The previous chapters have defined the objectives and rules of stowage
planning from the perspective of container types, vessel design, cargo
forecasts, and terminal operations. This chapter puts it all together by
describing the actual stowage planning work process.

Section 6.1 describes the work flow of the planning process and the
collaboration with other teams. Section 6.2 revises the complexity of stowage
planning. This is followed by an introduction to the software tools in the
market today in Section 6.3, where Stowman [34] is used as an example of
manual and semi-automated stowage planning. Finally Section 6.4 and 6.5
define key performance indicators of stowage planning and describes a
planning case study [26]. We thank Navis for permission to reproduce parts of
this white paper in these sections.

6.1 Work Flow Overview

Figure 6.1 shows an activity diagram of a typical stowage planning work
process. Besides the stowage planner, there are four other parties involved in
the process: cargo flow management, the local agent associated with the
terminal, the chief officer of the vessel, and the terminal.

As described in Section 1.2.3, the cargo flow (or capacity management) team is
responsible for creating the loadlist of the vessel. Some companies actively
involve the stowage planning team in this task and for that reason, we include
it in the stowage planning work process.

The selection of cargo to the loadlist depends on information from the terminal
about containers on the yard already delivered by customers and containers
rolled from last departure of the vessel. It also depends on planned
transshipments of cargo from other services to the vessel and the forecast of

173

===PAGE 174===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

Cargo Flow Local Stowage Chief Terminal
Management Agent Planner Officer

3 _Yes |.) Approved
Plan

Figure 6.1: Activity diagram of a typical stowage planning work process.

cargo in future ports. The forecast in turn depends on historical data and
agent information.

The stowage planner may be involved in the cargo selection by estimating if it
breaks the volume and container type capacities (e.g., exceeding maximum
number of reefer containers or 45’ containers).

When the selection is complete and it passes these capacity checks, the local
agent and cargo flow team refine the selection to a loadlist with more detailed
type and weight information. The stowage planner pre-stows the loadlist and
uses the arrival condition to check weight capacity and hydrostatic
requirements. The data in the loadlist (e.g., regarding dangerous goods) is
clarified in this process.

174

===PAGE 175===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

If the vessel is over-utilized, the cargo flow team is consulted to decide which
containers to roll. Alternatively, if the vessel unexpectedly has space for more
containers after stowing the loadlist, the cargo flow team is contacted to
propose which additional containers to load. It is also common to have
optionals on the loadlist. Optionals are containers that the stowage planner
can stow if there is space on the vessel or skip otherwise.

When the loadlist is complete, the actual stowage planning process begins. It
can take up to 5 hours to complete a single stowage plan and pass the stability
check. The process is described in detail in the remaining sections of this
chapter.

If the utilized stowage software tool can simulate the loading computer on
board the vessel, it is possible for the stowage planner always to know the
correct stability and stress force values associated with the stowage plan.
Otherwise, a file containing the stowage plan either must be transferred to
an installation of the loading computer on the stowage planner’s local
machine or send to the chief officer who then checks it on the loading
computer installed on the vessel. Both solutions are tedious as some loading
computers report errors without identifying the root cause of the error. For
instance, some loading computers may say that the line-of-sight rules are
broken without showing which rows on deck are causing the problem. As a
result, the stowage planner may have to go back and forth several times
between the stowage program and the loading computer to resolve a stability
problem.

The result is a stowage plan. It is preliminary in the sense that the terminal
may stow the vessel slightly different. It is send to the terminal. This normally
happens between 12 and 24 hours before the vessel arrives. The terminal
assigns containers from the yard to the plan and starts working on the vessel.
The terminal will always substitute containers in the plan when loading the
vessel due to dynamics of the terminal operations. A normal substitution is
between containers of the same type, but possibly with different weight (e.g.,
1-2 tons). The weight difference and the freedom of the substitutions in
general can be defined contractually between the liner shipper and the
terminal. The stowage planner is on call during the loading of the vessel and

175

===PAGE 176===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

must deal with any complications arising. The chief officer has the last say on
the final condition of the vessel.

The terminal keeps track of the substitutions and sends the departure
condition (approved plan) of the vessel to the stowage planner who then can
prepare for the stowage in the next port of call.

6.2 The Planning Challenge

A stowage plan assigns a slot on the vessel to each container on the loadlist to
allow for the optimal load and discharge of the vessel. As described in
previous chapters, it should take into account considerations for the ports in
the rotation, the number of ports in the rotation, the correct segregation of the
cargo, the number of cranes required, and the overall vessel stability.’

However, the reality of stowage planning is much more complex than this
implies. Container vessels can carry in the order of 20000 containers, giving an
astronomical number of possible solutions. In addition, the combinatorial
complexity of the problem is high due to a multi-dimensional nature with
constraints and objectives interacting across dimensions. Moreover, there is
no single solution. There are numerous combinations that can be applied to
solve the puzzle, and none of them can be described as truly correct or
incorrect. Every scenario has some positive aspects as well as potential for
optimization, often depending on what the stowage planner aims to do with
this particular stow.

Another thing to consider is that this is a never-ending puzzle in that it does
not even really have an end result, just steps along the way. Very rarely do
container vessels completely discharge and then reload. Usually they operate
in a continuous loop of port calls. At every port, some containers will be
discharged, and some will be loaded.

Due to the dynamic nature of container shipping operations, there is no "one
size fits all” solution to stowage. Every service, port, and vessel often have

1 This section is based on [26], Section 2.1.

176

===PAGE 177===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

different requirements and restrictions that affect the stowage. What works
well for one particular stowage plan might not work at all for another.

The optimum way to look at stowage is to break it down into its individual
components. There are quite clear rules for each specific aspect of stowage,
such as dangerous goods segregation, and it is then up to the stowage planner
to look at the aspect of the current stowage being dealt with and apply the
solutions that work in that particular instance.

It is a key characteristic of stowage planning that virtually every decision that
the planner makes comes down to a trade-off or compromise. One decision in
some place will have an effect elsewhere, too. Often good stowage planning is
about coming up with a solution that has the least negative effect on
something else.

What makes stowage planning even more complex is that the planner often
has to work with a combination of real-time data, forecast information and
experience. As shipping is very dynamic, this information tends to change on
short notice.

Stowage planning for a single port cannot be viewed in isolation. An individual
stowage instruction is just a snapshot of a vessel at a particular point in time
and does not give any context to the evolution of the stowage. Each stowage
has an impact on future ports in the rotation and is itself a product of
decisions taken earlier in the port rotation. For example, increasing the crane
intensity in one port can result in a reduction in crane intensity in a later port.

6.3 Software Tools

Before the use of personal computers in the liner shipping industry, stowage
planning was carried out with colored pens and a large sheet of paper witha
print of the bayplan showing the slots of each bay. The stowage planner would
decide, where to allocate PODs on the vessel by coloring the respective slots
on the bayplan. Despite much smaller vessels in those days, essentially every
aspect of stowage planning was extremely tedious. ROB containers had to be
colored-in manually first, and changing the plan was down to using an eraser

177

===PAGE 178===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

and re-coloring. Checking if the slots allocated for a particular POD would hold
the containers for that POD on the loadlist had to be manually computed.
Checking LOS, stability, and stress forces was a combination of hard work ona
pocket calculator and hopefully a good portion of mathematical intuition.

The access to affordable computers in the 1980s eased the work of stowage
planners considerably. The most important improvements of computer

supported stowage planning were:

= Agraphically supported stowage process, where the stowage planner can
manipulate the bayplan and loadlist graphically on the computer screen.

= Mouse-based planning. Normally, the planner is able to stow multiple
containers at a time by highlighting a set of slots in the bayplan and sort
the loadlist such that the containers to stow in the slots are at the top of
the list. The tool then transfers the right number of containers from the top
of the loadlist and applies best-practice stowage rules to assign the

containers to the highlighted slots.

= Fast computation of loadlist summary tables (recaps) giving the planner an
overview of the remaining containers to stow wrt. e.g. type and weight.

m Fast mouse-based unplanning and undo support.

= Ballast water and bunker planning.

= Electronic information about containers to load (e.g., over-dimensioned
containers and dangerous goods).

m Automatic computation of trim, list, draft, air-draft, reflection, etc.

= Automatic checks: stack weight and height, lashing forces, stress forces,
GM, LOS, separation of dangerous goods, etc.

= Automated crane utilization computations (crane split).

178

===PAGE 179===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

= Planning in future ports and overview of their condition.

= Use of electronic data in files and databases to input loadlists, tank, and
ROB condition, as well as output the produced plan.

= Build-in electronic transfer of data to loading computer on vessel to check
seaworthiness of the stowage plan.

= Optimization modules for semi-automated cargo and tank planning.

Below, we illustrate how these tools are used. We use StowMan [34] for this
purpose. StowMan is one of the most advanced tools in the market. It embeds
the loading computer Macs3 [33] that was introduced in the beginning of the
1980s and is installed on approximately 60% of the world fleet of container
vessels. Macs3, and therefore StowMan, uses a vessel profile data file that
contains the physical structure of the vessel and hydrostatic tables that
enable accurate hydrostatic parameters to be computed. The user interface of
StowMan including the menu structure and short-cuts is fully configurable,
allowing StowMan to be used by companies with significantly different work
processes.

6.3.1 Manual Planning

Figure 6.2 shows a typical bay view of StowMan. (A) is the bayplan and takes
up most of the screen. The level of detail in the view can be changed (e.g.,
showing tiers, rows, and indicators of broken rules). Each bay shows the
containers either currently stowed in this bay (ROB) or planned to be loaded in
the current port (in this case Yantian). As usual, color codes indicate POD, but
they can also be used to show e.g. the weight of containers. The containers are
shown in true height. (B) is the loadlist. It is filtered to show containers
destined for Algeciras. Moreover, the triangle above the weight column
indicates that the loadlist otherwise primarily is sorted with descending
weight. In planning mode, the planner can now drag a rectangle over any
empty slots and have the containers from the top of the loadlist planned in the
area. Many planners use two screens, in which case the loadlist normally is
moved to the second screen (e.g., a laptop screen), such that the whole

179

===PAGE 180===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

ee a

Figure 6.2: A typical bayplan view of StowMan: (A) Bayplan, (B) loadlist, (C) recap, (D) port rotation,
(E) seaworthiness checks. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from Navis Software, part of
Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

primary screen can be used to show the bay plan. (C) shows the recaps, which
is a tabular summary of the loadlist broken down into destination (rows) and
container types (columns). The planner can click cells in the recap to select
groups of containers to show in the loadlist view. The recap is fully
customizable. For instance, the planner could in this case add weight groups
and operator (in case of a VSA service). (D) is the port rotation. The highlighted
port is the current port. Clicking another port will change the bayplan, loadlist
and recap view to that port, allowing the planner to pre-plan the vessel in this
port. The blue water icon in this row of ports indicates where the longhaul is
on the rotation. (E) shows the status of major seaworthiness parameters such
as stress forces, trim, list, and GM.

By clicking a bay in the bayplan, a more detailed view appears as shown for
bay 18 in Figure 6.3. The view is changed to 20’ mode, where the fore (17) and
aft part (19) of the bay is shown. This eases inspection and stowage of 20°
containers. (A) is a vertical row of tier numbers. (B) is a table showing
information for each row. For rows on deck, it shows row number (R), remaining
20' weight capacity in tons of the row (rW), total weight of 20’ containers in the
row (W), maximum force in percent of total capacity of securing equipment

180

===PAGE 181===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

7 SEEEERLE
virwipwiniviaioivion Gl Fitlvivivviinewireininareaat B

Figure 6.3: View of the fore (17) and aft (19) part of single bay (18): (A) Tier numbering, (B) stack num-

bering and calculations, (C) hatch covers, (D) reefer slots, (E) stowed containers (used with permis-
sion from Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

ay

such as lashing rods of the row (%F), and remaining height of the row. To get
the weight capacity of 40’ containers, the view is changed to 40’. (C) shows the
physical position of hatch covers of the bay. (D) are snowflake icons indicating
that the slot can hold a reefer container. (E) are stowed containers. Each
container in this setup is colored according to its POD. Text on the container is
the weight in tons (top) and POL (bottom). The filled triangle in right bottom
corner indicates whether the container is a reefer. The planner can plan
containers in the single bay view just as in the total bay view.

The condition of bunker and water ballast tanks is important for adjusting
trim, list, and GM of the vessel as well as reducing the stress forces acting on
it. Figure 6.4 shows a typical tank view of StowMan. (A) is the tank groups
shown as colored rows in the table. In this case the water ballast tank group is
selected (green) and the individual tanks are shown in a table below the group
overview. Details about the selected tank DB SIDE 4-5 P are written in the list
above, and its position on the vessel is shown as red-marked areas in other
views. (B) is the physical location of the tanks of the selected tank group.
Filled tanks are dark green. (C) shows the stress curves along the vessel: shear

181

===PAGE 182===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

Figure 6.4: View of the tank condition and the stress curves: (A) Tank groups, (B) physical arrangement
of tanks, (C) stress (used with permission from Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

forces (blue), bending moments (brown), and torsion moments (green).
Maximum and minimum values are indicated on the graph.

6.3.2 Semi-Automated Planning

The differencing features of modern stowage software tools are mainly their
ability to integrate with database systems and use optimization algorithms.
The former is fairly straightforward to provide, while the latter has turned out
to be achallenge.

The Holy Grail of stowage planning optimization is to push a button and let the
computer figure out where to place the containers on the loadlist and how
much ballast tanks should be filled. The state-of-the-art systems are
currently not at this ideal, in particular because the cargo to load in
downstream ports is uncertain, making it hard to figure out where to place
the containers in the current port to protect the capacity needed in future
ports. Even if this problem is factored out by making the stowage planner
decide the POD distribution along the vessel, stowage planning optimization
remains challenging due to the combinatorial complexity of the problem and
its high dimensionality.

182

===PAGE 183===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

The liner shipping companies have for almost two decades had internal
stowage optimization projects, notably PO NedLoyd [57], APL [59], and Maersk
Line [29]. This has lead to sufficient insight and academic research on the
topic for suppliers to integrate optimization modules in their software. Among
these are VAP [49] by Solverminds,? CASP [7], and StowMan [34].

Here we go in detail with a solution offered in StowMan called StowManS. The
idea is that the planner in each iteration of the planning process computes a
complete stowage plan rather than planning a small subset of containers. The
optimization module provides decision support and can be thought of as an
assistant that the planner instructs.

One set of instructions are position specific. These are rules about the
stowage plan that the planner superimposes on the bayplan. The rules are
shown in Figure 6.5. (A) is a locking rule saying that the containers already

Figure 6.5: Rules of the optimization module of StowMan: (A) Locking rules, (B) type rules,
(C) blocking rules. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used with permission from Navis Software, part of
Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

2 VAP is not included in our product overview in Section 6.3.3 due to its small market
curves.

183

===PAGE 184===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

planned for this area (e.g., in previous iterations of the optimizer) should stay
where they are. (B) is a type rule, where the planner can restrict which kind of
cargo wrt. length, height, weight, reefer, and POD that can be stowed in the
area. (C) is a blocking rule that disallows the optimizer to plan any containers
in the marked region. The planner can also simply stow some of the containers
from the loadlist manually to guide the optimizer. Similar rules exist for ballast
water tanks.

In addition to the position specific rules, there are more general instructions.
These are shown in Figure 6.6. The planner first sets the region objectives (a).

Ideally, the vessel is either volume or weight pressed on the fronthaul. By

op he annem +t ie ee ST eae eet ST
[aah me el ro — rate Sel

sete a lee

—

(a) (b) (c)

Figure 6.6: Objectives tabs of the optimization module of StowMan. MACS3 screenshot [33] (used
with permission from Navis Software, part of Cargotec, © Cargotec Finland Oy).

indicating this, the optimizer will stow export cargo either volume (optimal HC/
DC mix) or weight dense (use all stack weight capacity for out of region
containers). In both cases, the fronthaul can also be reefer pressed in which
case the optimizer must be careful not to use reefer plugs for non-reefer
export containers. If the fronthaul has excess capacity, the optimizer focuses
on minimizing operational costs. In the bottom part of this tab, the planner
sets the crane intensity targets for future ports. The optimizer will then avoid

184

===PAGE 185===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

a long crane of discharge moves accordingly for these ports. The planner then
shifts to define the layout of containers (b). The first table is used to decide in
which patterns, the containers for each POD are stowed. For instance, by
choosing a pattern with low capacity such as center only, the planner causes
the cargo to be spread out to more bays than if choosing a pattern with high
capacity such as full bays. Notice that this instruction says nothing about
where the cargo is loaded and therefore is orthogonal with the position
specific rules described above. The layout pattern table also allows the
planner to restrict the maximum height of the stacks for each POD and
includes an estimate of whether the vessel has the required wings and center
for the chosen patterns. Below the layout pattern table, the planner can give
additional instructions about how the containers are stowed. Finally, the
planner can set hydrostatic targets (c). A range for trim and GM can be given
and below that, a buffer zone on stress forces can be entered. At the bottom
of this tab, instructions for loading ballast water can be given (in this case only
load is allowed).

The planner can give several other instructions to the optimizer that we will
not discuss here. The optimizer computes a plan according to the instructions
of the planner. The resulting plan is shown in a dashboard, where company
specific key performance indicators are computed to give the planner an
overview. The planner can transfer an optimized plan to the bayplan of
StowMan and give new instruction to optimize this plan further.

With a computation time in the order of 60 seconds, this allows the planner to
refine the plan and explore different solutions to a much larger extend than is
possible when planning the containers manually. The result is plans with
higher quality and a better utilization of the capacity of the vessels.

185

===PAGE 186===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

6.3.3 Software Vendors

In 2017, the market was dominated by six software tools for stowage planning
with a total market share of more than 90%. The tools offer different features.
The most important of these are:

= Dangerous Goods. The tool supports stowage and separation rules of
dangerous cargo and is able to indicate DG containers in a stowage plan
that do not satisfy the regulation that the vessel operates under.

= Multi-Leg. It is possible to see the stowage condition of the vessel in
several ports and plan expected loadlist for future ports.

= Loading Computer. The tool integrates a loading computer that makes it
possible to compute the hydrostatic condition of the vessel and determine

whether it is seaworthy, and find the cause of the problem otherwise.

= Lashing. The tool can simulate lashing forces of a vessel condition
according to its lashing regulation.

= Specific Weights. The user can plan containers with given specific weights
rather than approximate weight or weight groups.

= Cranesplit. The tool can compute the crane schedule and work time fora
given stowage plan.

= Visibility. The tool computes line of sight and blocked angles and can
determine if a particular visibility regulation is satisfied. It can also identify

containers that break the visibility rules.

= Optimizer. The tool integrates an optimization engine that can compute
stowage plans according to the preferences of the planner.

Acomparison of the six major software tools is shown in Table 6.1.

186

===PAGE 187===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

Name CA Power- Stow- CAPSTAN4 | Simple- | Opus
Ow man{[S) Stow Stowage

Producer Total Soft | NAVIS/ INTER- Miller & AMT Cyber
Bank XVELA SCHALT Blank Logitec
South South
HQ Rreael USA Germany | Germany | Canada oral
Market Launch 1991 1995 2014 2002 2006 2011
Vessel Profiles N/A N/A c. 7500 N/A c. 1200 N/A

Market Share

by TEU 37% 29% 14% 7% <5% <5%
by Vessel 28% 22% 17% 6% <5% <5%
Dangerous goods + (+) + + + +
Multi-leg + + + +

Loading Computer + + +
Lashing WP + +

Specific Weights + + +

Cranesplit a

Visibility +

Optimizer =F =F

Table 6.1: Feature comparison of the six dominating stowage tools on the market 2015 [14].

6.4 Key Performance Indicators

As discussed in Section 6.2, one of the challenges of stowage planning is that a
stowage problem often has many equally good solutions. Moreover, stowage
objectives often interact. For instance maximizing the uptake may require
mixing many PODs in some bays, which in turn may reduce the crane utilization.
The planner has to make the best trade-off between different objectives. For
most planners, this is the real art of stowage planning. Sometimes it is merely
about making the least harmful plan rather than a good one.

It is challenging to evaluate the quality of stowage plans. Some criteria like
rolling a container or increasing the port stay can be expressed in monetary
value, but others like reducing BM with 5% are hard to estimate in this way. To
understand this in depth, it is important to remember that many decisions in

187

===PAGE 188===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

planning has to do with the uncertainty of the future. How much cargo will
there be in downstream ports? What cargo mix will a partner have in a vessel
sharing agreement (VSA)? Due to this uncertainty it is important to make
robust plans that will perform acceptable in the most probable future
scenarios (i.e., "keep the doors open” in a stowage).

Nevertheless, it is important for liner shipping companies to evaluate stowage
plans. The question is: what are the main key performance indicators (KPIs)
and how should they be evaluated?

Starting with the second part of the question, it is clear that a total monetary
score of a stowage plan to some extend is undermined by the uncertainty of
measuring the value of some KPIs. For that reason, it is important to clarify
the measuring method or the lack thereof for each KPI and report these values
individually as well as in total to give the most accurate picture of qualities
along different dimensions.

With respect to the first part of the question, there is no general agreement
about what the main KPls of stowage planning are. Different companies have
used different KPls and evaluation methods. The most comprehensive KPls to
date are probably due to a recent case study [26]. This study compares plans
for half of a service rotation using different stowage tools. For that reason the
KPls evaluate a set of plans rather than a single plan. This makes sense,
though, as many strategies such as crane utilization are implemented over
several ports.

The KPIs and their ratings are shown in Table 6.2. Some KPls have a separate
rating, which means that they depend on the service in question. We will get
back to these special ratings later in the chapter, where we use the case study
to illustrate manual planning strategies.

Stowage planners from four major liner shipping companies have defined the
KPls and they get support from several lead planners and economic experts in
the field. The remainder of this section motivates the KPls as described in the
case study.

188

===PAGE 189===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

KPI Goal Rating
Financial Planning time Shortest Time
No. of new stowage Several None
attempts
Crane intensity Fits no. cranes USD
Deadspace below deck | Fewest USD
Containers not loaded | Fewest USD
Restows Fewest/Cheapest USD
Suez tier Minimum tiers USD
Safety Lashing errors None Must
Line of sight No violation Must
DG conflicts None Must
Stability GM Target value Must
BM it Must
SF Within limits Must
™ Within limits Must
Draft Within limits Must
Efficiency Costal Trim Target value USD
Final Trim Target value USD
Ballast Water Minimum USD

Table 6.2: The stowage planning KPIs defined in (26).

6.4.1 Financial Criteria
Planning time
It has many positive effects to be able to create a stowage plan in short time:

= Postponing the deadline. The planner can postpone the deadline/cargo
cut-off, which gives the planner the possibility to gather more cargo for the
vessel.

= Last minute changes. The planner can make last minute changes or totally
replan the vessel in situations where cargo will break away, and hereby
ensure that the next port will not have any effect on these changes.

= Checking alternative stowages. The planner has the possibility to create

more plans to check alternatives for the planning and to analyse
opportunities in the next port.

189

===PAGE 190===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

= Preplanning the voyage. The planner can preplan the whole voyage and
inform the cargo flow management team if any space is left or if the vessel
should make an ad hoc call in order to fully use all space on board.

Overall, more time equals more quality and possibilities, but it is a KPI that is
hard to express in dollar value.

Number of stowage attempts

The number of new stowage attempts is the number of different stowage
layouts for the whole cargo compartment before finalizing the stowage. When
planning manually, there is usually not enough time to make several different
loading plans and compare the consequences for the stability, draft, trim etc.
in order to find the very best cargo arrangement.

However, when planning is supported by an optimizer that can generate a
complete plan in seconds, the planner has the option to generate and check
different loading plans of the same cargo and instantly see and compare
consequences.

The number of stowage attempts is a rough measure of how many possible
future scenarios or opportunities the planner have considered, and in this way
it estimates the robustness of the plan. It is difficult, though, to express this
KPI in monetary terms.

Crane intensity

Recall from Chapter 5 that crane intensity is the total number of discharge and
load moves of quay cranes divided by the moves of the long crane (or
alternatively the total move time divided by the time of the long crane). It
expresses how many cranes can work efficiently on the vessel in the sense
that adding an extra crane will not reduce the port stay.

When the vessel arrives to a terminal, the Cl of expected load and discharge

moves should be equal to or slightly higher than the number of proforma
cranes (the expected number of cranes as per contract).

190

===PAGE 191===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

ACI smaller than the number of proforma cranes will result in the vessel
staying on the berth longer than the agreed proforma time. This will generate
additional costs due to increased port fees and possible higher speed on the
next leg to catch up on the schedule. If these costs can be reasonably
estimated, the Cl KPI can be given a dollar value.

Dead space below deck

A good stowage plan uses the available space on board most efficiently in
order to have minimum slots remaining unused below deck in regards to the
available cargo mix. Ensuring to keep lost slots below deck to a minimum will
enable the planner to increase the vessel’s overall utilization and as such
becomes a vital argument in an economic sense. To minimize the unsused slots
below deck, the planner has to consider both the stack weights, the stack
height, and the mix of container types to be loaded for that specific port/bay.
Lost slots can be turned into a dollar value by using a typical freight rate.

Containers not loaded

As a matter of course, transporting all intended containers is the main
purpose of container shipping lines as such. Any full container not loaded
might lead to customer service failure since it may not be shipped on the
vessel requested by the customer, not be delivered in time to its final
destination, and/or give rise to potential additional costs at the port of loading
due to additional storage, re-nomination fee for next vessel etc.

Any empty container not loaded might lead to storage charges, a necessity to
re-route or lease additional empty containers at extra costs, or even reject full
cargo at the port of loading if the former options are not available. An excellent
stowage plan maximizes the space available for loading at each port within
stability and lashing force limits, while keeping as many options open as
possible for future cargo to be loaded. In this way the plans stay flexible to
cover future loadings for any port of discharge and any cargo mix.

The number of rolled containers can be turned into a dollar value simply by
multiplying with their freight rate.

191

===PAGE 192===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

Restows

The number of containers to be shifted by crane from their original position on
board is called restows. To shift containers results in additional operation time
as well as extra costs, as the terminal will usually charge each restow. Restow
costs will lead to a direct increase of operational costs. Additionally, operation
time might delay the vessel’s departure and therefore indirectly increase fuel
costs as well, since the vessel has to proceed to the next port at a higher
speed causing higher fuel consumption. There are five main reasons for
making restows:

a Empty containers overstowing other containers.

= Change of destination (COD) of a container after it has been already loaded.
= Space issues at present port of loading.

= Stability/lashing force issues.

= Minimizing Suez Canal fees related to tiers loaded in deck.

Other restows might result from wrong decisions taken in earlier ports, and
the planner’s utmost attention must be put on preventing such situations to
be created by finding a good loading arrangement. Creating minimum restows
is therefore one of the major goals for a good stowage plan.

The restow KPI can be measured as a dollar value as a sum of restow charges
of the terminal in question, additional port time fees, and possibly additional
bunker if restows cause reduced sailing time.

6.4.2 Suez Tiers

When loading a service that is passing through the Suez Canal, the planner
must try to load only the minimum number of tiers on deck necessary, since
the Suez Canal fee includes a variable surcharge according to the tiers of
containers actually loaded on deck. This surcharge may result in additional
costs per tier (approximately 10-20000 USD in 2015).

The ability of planners and slot controllers to foresee the number of tiers

needed and arrange loadings up to that level while minimizing the deadspace
below deck can make a substantial difference in the Suez Canal costs.

192

===PAGE 193===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

Therefore it can help to keep operational costs at a minimum and ensure a
profitable voyage.

The dollar value of this KPI can be computed directly from the Suez Canal
surcharges agreed with the company.

6.4.3 Safety Criteria

Lashing errors

A vessel where some lashing forces are above 100% of the limit is normally not
allowed to continue its voyage due to safety reasons. Therefore, it is crucial for
the planner to stay within the lashing force limits. A good planner also
considers expected GM in future ports, since the lashing forces grow with GM,
which may turn a stack from being within limits to exceed limits in future ports.

Line of Sight (LOS)

It is very important for the planner to factor in LOS in order to have as many
containers as possible onboard while still fulfilling the applied LOS rule. Trim
must be taken into consideration as negative trim (nose down) increases LOS.
In most cases, however, the planner can not take advantage of this as the
vessel often is required to be at even keel during piloting in and out of port.

Dangerous Goods Conflicts

The DG rules are complex and the planner must ensure that there are no
conflicts in the stowage as erros can lead to disasterous results like fires.
Stowage tools that check DG rules automatically are an advantage.

6.4.4 Stability

The three main forces BM, SF, and TM must be within limits for the vessel to
be seaworthy. Again, the planner must take the rotation into account. For
instance, the first port in a new region is often a discharge only port, since it
typically will be called again before leaving the region. For that reason placing
heavy cargo at the fore and aft end of the vessel for later ports will result in a
situation after discharging in the port, where the vessel is heavy in the ends
but light in the middle. This normally leads to too high bending moments.

193

===PAGE 194===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

Best practice regarding TM is to avoid it in a stow and also avoid that
discharge causes TM to appear. The reason is that TM is hard to fix with
ballast water as explained in Section 3.3.2.

6.4.5 Efficiency

Optimum Trim

The trim influences the bunker consumption, which has an impact on the
economic as well as the environmental outcome. In order to reach the optimal
trim of the vessel per loaded cargo, it is necessary to be considered during
stowage. Too much aft trim will increase the friction on the vessel caused by
the stern being in the water. This will increase fuel consumption. When there is
too much trim forward, the rudder and propeller may not be sufficiently
submerged. Particularly at low speeds, it will be difficult to control the vessel.

Trim target coastal. The trim target for the coastal voyage is most important
for ports with draft restriction (e.g., Hamburg port). For such cases, it is
important that the vessel has even keel.

Trim target final port. As mentioned above, a trim too much to the forward
part can be a problem if the vessel is not sufficiently submerged. Particularly
at low speeds, it will be difficult to control the vessel. But if the vessel is
submerged to ideal draft with the optimal trim, the vessel will save bunker due
to better efficiency of the propeller and engine. These two points are very
important for the planner, especially how he has reached them. The ideal
approach is to do it with cargo. The second option is to use ballast water. The
economical impact of trim is mainly on the ocean leg after the final port (i.e.,
the last port in the region). Most vessels has bunker consumption tables,
where bunker can be defined as a function of displacement and trim. It is
therefore straight forward to translate this KPI to a dollar value.

Ballast Water

Ballast water has an ambivalent effect on the overall condition and
performance of the vessel. On the one hand it helps to give the vessel the
required condition in order to sail or give 100% performance to the vessel. On
the other hand, every ton ballast onboard is a ton that could have been used to

194

===PAGE 195===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

load paying cargo or that influences the fuel consumption and therefore the
environmental impact.

Reducing the intake of ballast water to increase volume or weight capacity to
paying cargo is one of the main targets for increasing efficiency. The KPI can
be translated into a dollar value either by computing increased bunker cost or
value of closed space/weight capacity using average freight rate.

6.5 Case Study

In the rest of this chapter, we present a stowage planning case study
introduced in [26]. The purpose of this case study is to compare the manual
and semiautomated stowage planning paradigm and is the only extensive
analysis of the stowage planning work process that we are aware of. The KPIs
described in Section 6.4 are another contribution of the work in [26]. They were
defined mainly to compare plans, but are to our knowledge the most
comprehensive set of stowage planning KPIs published to date.

6.5.1 Setup

The case study uses several measures to ensure that results translate back to
the real world. First, all data concerning services, vessels, loadlists, etc. are
from a real historic voyage of a vessel. Second, the case procedure, e.g. the
rules of the case, are described well and reflect real planning. In addition,
control activities have been carried out in order to ensure that the procedure
is closely followed. Third, the four planners making the stowage plans of the
case study have been instructed about the vessel and the service in general,
e.g. their basic knowledge is similar to that of the real planners of the service.
Finally, they plan port by port, getting the loadlist from the referee, an
independent person, just when they start the planning for that port. The
referee takes care that the planners do not exchange information.

StowMan is used for the study in two settings as follows. Manual planning: the
integrated checks on hydrostatics due to the embedded loading computer are
disabled to simulate the usual situation, where the planner transfers the plan
to the loading computer software and checks hydrostatics and lashing.

195

===PAGE 196===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

SemiAutomated planning: the integrated optimizer (StowManS) and loading
computer are enabled and used during planning.

The vessel and voyage data consists of the following files: a StowMan ship
profile of a 400 meter long and 56 meter wide vessel with a capacity of 19000
TEU and 1000 reefer plugs. It has a deadweight of 190000 tons and maximum
speed of 25 knots; the arrival condition of the vessel in the first port to plan
(cargo, ballast, bunker, etc.); a service description with data for all ports of the
rotation, e.g, max draft, number of cranes and crane productivity, port time,
restow costs, and company rules; loadlists (available one at a time before
planning); a forecast sheet to give the planners some indicators about typical
cargo on the service without providing all details of the loadlist; instructions
about trim and maximum planning time.

The planner team consists of four experienced stowage planners with more
than 40 years of combined stowage experience from four major liner shipping
companies. In the case study, two planners stow the voyage, one using the
manual planning and the other using semi-automated planning. A third planner
acts as referee and ensures that both planners get exactly the same data. The
referee takes care that they do not exchange information, collects the stowage
plans and other results port by port, confirms the time taken for the planning,
and hands out the next loadfile. The planners have to comment their activities
and decisions during the test in an electronic log.

6.5.2 Service Case

The case study considers an Asia-Europe service. Asia-Europe services are the
primary services of most shipping lines. They have a high ranking position for
the organization and is normally used to introduce the newest of the newly
build large vessels such as the vessel used in the case study.

The selected service has weekly calls. It is designed for a 77-day round trip.
The service is operated with 11 vessels of comparable size. The east-bound
voyage has the following port rotation: Felixstowe (FXT), Rotterdam (RTM),
Hamburg (HAM), Zeebrugge (ZEE), and Rotterdam (RTM). The port rotation of
the west-bound voyage is: Port Kelang (PKG), Yantian (YTN), Qingdao (TAO),

196

===PAGE 197===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

Figure 6.7: The Asia-Europe service analysed in the case study.

Shanghai (SHA), Ningbo (NGB), Yantian (YTN), Singapore (SIN), Port Kelang
(PKG), and Felixstowe (FXT). The service is shown in Figure 6.7.

An important characteristic of the east-bound voyage is that it has no coastal
cargo. Thus, the first call to Rotterdam is a pure discharge call, while the
second call is a pure load call. The challenges for the east-bound stowage is
the huge amount of empties to Ningbo (the last POD (the turn port)) that needs
to be loaded in Felixstowe (the first POL) where the storage cost are normally
very high. The double call of Rotterdam is executed in order to bring these big
vessels to Hamburg. The Hamburg call is very important due to the high value
of west-bound and east-bound cargo. The problem of the Hamburg call is the
draft restriction, which for these vessel types is 12.5 meter by normal water
level. So in times with a lot of cargo, it is very important to trim the vessel by
cargo to limit the draft. The Zeebrugge call is known for its very heavy cargo
with an average weight of 26 tons per TEU. The last call at Rotterdam defines
the overall difficult cargo mix of the service with very heavy containers and
empties, especially for Port Kelang with most heavy cargo and nearly no
empties.

One of the challenges of the west-bound stowage is having a vessel, which is
able to leave Port Kelang on the first call without any loadings. On the

197

===PAGE 198===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

westbound stowage, there is a double call at Port Kelang and Yantian which
will generate coastal cargo. The cargo mix from Far East is much more suitable
for the fully loaded vessel design as the average cargo weight is much less
than on the east-bound stowage.

For the case study, the east-bound voyage was chosen because it has the
more challenging set of port calls. There is a much more complex cargo mix to
deal with, including high volumes of empty containers in the early ports, high

volumes of very heavy containers (in particular 20’ containers) in the later
ports, DG containers, reefer containers, and OOG units. The proforma
description (i.e., terminal information) of this voyage is shown in Table 6.3.
Notice that such key information about the terminals on the rotation of the
service is normally a part of the service data given to stowage planners.

Felixstowe | Rotterdam | Hamburg e Rotterdam
Port rotation GBFXT NLRTM DEHAM BEZEE NLRTM
Pro forma moves 6000 3500 5500 3000 4000
Proforma port stays | 44 24 48 26 30
(hrs)
Pro forma crane 6 4-5 5-6 4-5 5-6
intensity
Berth production 136 146 115 115 133
Bmph
Berthing side (P/S) PORT PORT PORT STB PORT
Crane outreach (Row) 23 23 23 23 23
Crane separation (bet. | 40 40 40 40 40
bays able to work)
Max draft alongside 17 16 13.5 15.5 16
(m)
Max HC on deck 10 9 8 8 9
Min draft alongside 14 13 13 13 13
(m)
Water density 1.015 1.025 1 1.025 1.025
Max. departure draft 17 16 12.5 15.5 16

Table 6.3: Proforma description of the east-bound voyage [26].

198

===PAGE 199===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

6.5.3 Port 1: Felixstowe

The planning starts at Felixstowe. The vessel arrives fully loaded with 17028
TEU on board. 6691 TEU are immediately discharged in Felixstowe. ROB after
discharge is 10337 TEU with Zeebrugge, Hamburg, and Rotterdam as POD.
Dead space under deck with this cargo is 195 TEU. The trim is 1.64 meters aft
with 15700 tons ballast. Table 6.4 shows a summary of load and discharge in
Felixstowe and Rotterdam.

In Felixstowe, it is especially important for the planners to lay the groundwork
for the correct crane split in Asia, since the intention is to load the highest
number of TEU out of all loading ports. Not only planning for Felixstowe, the
planners need to consider the next port, Rotterdam, as it is purely a discharge
call, with a total of 3804 TEU to discharge. If the planner overlooks the
Rotterdam call, he may have to incur restows or add additional but
unnecessary ballast water to maintain the seaworthiness of the ship, in order
to get to Hamburg. Thus, it is essentially a stow build for two ports.

Manual Planning

The total planning time was two hours. One plan was considered. All
containers were loaded. The focus of the planning was to bring the GM down to
enable higher tier to be loaded in later ports. The empty containers were
loaded under Port Kelang cargo to reduce the number of restows in the port,
but also to help in bringing down the GM. 9000 tons of ballast water was added
manually to counteract shear forces on the aft part of the vessel. In hindsight,
it would have been a good idea to load one tier less of Port Kelang cargo on
deck as this had to be restowed in later ports in order to load empty units on
top. Almost no time lost in moving data to the loading computer and checking
seaworthiness there. The departure condition is shown in Figure 6.8.

Semi-Automated Planning

The total planning time was 1.5 hours. Seven plans were considered. All
containers were loaded. Seven runs of the optimizer were made, with one
fitting the objectives of the stowage. Four manual corrections were needed to
solve lashing errors. The optimizer added 2000 tons of ballast water to get
vessel on even keel. The departure condition is shown in Figure 6.9.

199

===PAGE 200===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

zig 2|s > = alg
Zip slg S25 2g ®lz

ner | os - ~
~le -l= rs 2
3/2 2/8 - -
>= «le = =

z2~| als
5/8) 2 Hele
28 58 S2Rce
Zig slg 25"
ADB 2 c=

ABE 225 ie slg
ABBE 25" 38 2/2

200

===PAGE 201===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

201

===PAGE 202===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

202

===PAGE 203===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

6.5.4 Port 2: Rotterdam

Rotterdam is a discharge only call, with a total of 3804 TEU discharged. Much

of the work should already have been done while planning for Felixstowe. This

port is also the last port to consider the lower crane height requirement in the
next two ports, Hamburg and Zeebrugge. Any bays or stacks that are too high

for Hamburg and Zeebrugge cranes will have to be changed. There also needs

to be monitoring of the allowable draft limits for Hamburg, taking into account
that this is a freshwater port.

Manual Planning
The total planning time was just 5 minutes. No ballast water changes were
needed. The departure condition is shown in Figure 6.10.

Semi-Automated Planning

The total planning time was 5 minutes. About 3000 tons of ballast water was
discharged by the optimizer to get vessel on even keel. One restow was made
caused by Far East stowage. The departure condition is shown in Figure 6.11.

203

===PAGE 204===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

204

===PAGE 205===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

205

===PAGE 206===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

6.5.5 Port 3: Hamburg

With 3000 containers to be loaded and 3500 to be discharged, Hamburg is the
port with the highest number of moves on the east-bound voyage. The
planners need to take note of the crane height limit of maximum eight HC
containers and the departure draft of at most 12.5 meters. With about 10000
TEU, the vessel is half loaded when leaving Hamburg. Table 6.5 shows a
summary of load and discharge in Hamburg.

Manual Planning

The total planning time was one hour. One plan was considered. All containers
were loaded. The planner focused on loading the forward and aft ends of the
vessel to leave space in the center to load the very heavy units that will come
in the next two ports. Ballast when leaving Hamburg was 21577 tons, but this
was just to solve a bending moment issues. This issue will solve itself in the
next two ports as heavy 20’ will be loaded. Again, not much time was lost
checking stability and lashing issues in the loading computer. The departure
condition is shown in Figure 6.12.

Semi-Automated Planning

The total planning time was 1.5 hours. Six plans were considered. 12
corrections and restows were made due to the Far-East stowage. The
optimizer reduced the total amount of ballast water to 2800 tons with an even
keel. The departure condition is shown in Figure 6.13.

206

===PAGE 207===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

2
>. a
w =[e
— a | 7
- =|
=

= 5 stele s

> i = |S) a

5

a8 Bell:

8

-— 8) 8 2

fp pon:

8 28 2 S/5/8 | 2

2

- & ile le

8

BE B/E | &

Ssee2elzis |2

8 28 2 S/s/8 | =

£

S88 2 8/2/8 | 2

2

= 2/E ef e/eig] 2

, iv

e® 2 6 2 sisl= l=

hh S

By

S g 2 s

eee eee |

e 8 3 €

SB BLE

o| o

z 2

3|a8| 2

207

===PAGE 208===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

208

===PAGE 209===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

209

===PAGE 210===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

6.5.6 Port 4: Zeebrugge

Zeebrugge is the second last port of the east-bound voyage and has 3400 TEU
to be loaded and 660 TEU to be discharged. There is heavy dangerous goods
loading for Port Kelang, Qingdao, and Shanghai, totalling around 250 TEU. Like
Hamburg, Zeebrugge also has a crane height restriction which needs to be
taken care of. Table 6.6 shows a summary of load and discharge in Zeebrugge.

Manual Planning

The total planning time was one hour. One plan was considered. All containers
were loaded. There were a high number of 20’ units in this port that ended up
in the bottom of the vessel which did not help in keeping GM down, but there
was no alternative realistic option. The ballast onboard was slightly less at
21184 tons, as the weight started to get loaded in the center of the vessel. It
was challenging and time consuming to reduce the dead space under deck.
360 TEU were killed. The departure condition is shown in Figure 6.14.

Semi-Automated Planning

The total planning time was 30 minutes. Two plans were considered and all
containers were loaded. There were two runs of the optimizer. Vessel sailed on
even keel with additional 7000 tons of ballast. The dead space at departure
was 195 TEU. The departure condition is shown in Figure 6.15.

210

===PAGE 211===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

+
si? ala
5/8 7 2\7
° 2/e
¥
FA
@ *\s & 8s 3
2
Me HE 2
8
rr == FS
~ €
§
2 ie seu) 2
258 & 8/8 | 8
$
i 2/§ |&
—_/8
& es |8
5g & le | 8
aR 3 ele |4
e fie 2 els\e | 3
&
JE Ef oH:Dh OU
5
3
Ss 2/2 f/a/s/8 | 2
2 |R] =
2 2) <2:
g s\F | 3
2 8 6 = 8/2|38 | =
€
2 3 zl—@ |é
ABUL
oS
z 3s
a [a8] 2

211

===PAGE 212===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

212

===PAGE 213===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

213

===PAGE 214===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

6.5.7 Port 5: Rotterdam

In the last port of the east-bound voyage, another 3900 TEU have to be loaded.
On the loadlist are many heavy 20’ containers, surprisingly also about 100
reefer containers (previous ports only had a few). The vessel will leave
Rotterdam with a load of 16800 TEU, which means that it is practically fully
loaded. The consequence of any wrong decision taken in previous ports will be
shown in this port. Table 6.7 shows a summary of load for the second call of
Rotterdam.

Manual Planning

The total planning time was four hours. One plan was considered. 135
containers were not loaded of which 133 were 40’ empties and two were laden
40’ and 20’, respectively. This stowage was by far the most challenging in
terms of balancing getting the cargo on board and reducing the number of
restows. It was decided to roll some of the empty containers because of the
cost of leaving them behind. If the dead space had been better kept at a
minimum earlier, it would probably have been possible to load more of the
empty units. The final ballast was reduced to only 1809 tons and the trim was
-1.97 m. Thus, optimal trim was achieved with minimum ballast. 75 lashing
errors shown by the loading computer had to be resolved before finishing the
stowage. There were 179 restows in Rotterdam and there will be 393 restows
in Port Kelang. The total load was 16522 TEU. The departure condition is shown
in Figure 6.16.

Semi-Automated Planning

The total planning time was two hours. 10 plans were considered. All
containers were loaded. 10 runs of the optimizer were made and some manual
work was carried out. The cargo was loaded with a small number of restows.
Departure trim was off by one meter from the optimal trim due to heavy 20’
units with only aft positions free for loading. The optimizer helped to reduce
the dead space. The vessel will be able to sail from Port Kelang without any
loadings and with little adjustment to the ballast. There were 46 restows in
Rotterdam due to lashing errors, and 233 restows in Port Kelang. Total load
was 16791 TEU. The departure condition is shown in Figure 6.17.

214

===PAGE 215===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

- =
o ©
> é
eo 7 2
= 5 8
= =
g
eae @/3/ =
z/® gl2/2|3
3
=
= 8 2 £ 8/5/8
2 S/2)2) 2
5
8
5 gie2|2
€
5
2
> 2 =| 2
8 2)2 § S| 2
~ e Ff 8) so
“Sou ok
= a * i
o
N
S@ 2 2e e|N
SB 2 Zl
5
3

= g]2
B e| 5
288 2 8)3/3
Sob cbeisl:
Si - 8B
“| 8

8 2/8 2/8/3/5
8

S 5ig # 8/s| 2
aoe
§
628 & Rl" | 2
Ss

s/| 2

S| 8

215

===PAGE 216===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

216

===PAGE 217===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

217

===PAGE 218===
Chapter 6 | Stowage Planning Process

6.5.8 Conclusion

The case study demonstrates several key aspects of stowage planning. First,
as discussed earlier there is not a single good solution. The manual and
semi-automated plans look quite different but both achieve good crane
utilization in the Asian ports. Second, stowage plans seldom dominate each
other with respect to all KPls. It is a trade-off. In the case study, the
semi-automated approach loads more containers to Asia, but does not achieve
optimal trim. Finally, the study shows that ports in the rotation often have very
different challenges. In particular, the discharge condition of discharge ports
only is fully decided by the stowage decisions of previous ports (except for the
use of ballast water and restows). Hamburg on the other hand is challenged by
restricted draft made worse by freshwater.

The purpose of the case study was to analyse the impact of using optimization
algorithms in stowage tools. Even though we cannot conclude from a single
case, the optimizer seemed to enable the planner to explore more solutions
and avoid tedious work such as reducing dead space below deck by mixing the
number of HC and DC containers ideally in stacks. The results of the two
approaches were compared with respect to the KPls given in Section 6.4 as
shown in Table 6.8. The comparison estimates that the semi-automated
stowage approach leads to a yield increase for this voyage of about USD 75K
corresponding to a yearly yield increase of USD 3.9M.

218

===PAGE 219===
Chapter6 | Stowage Planning Process

Criteria Manual StowMan Results in USD
planning planning Rotterdam

Deviation
in percent

StowMan
planning

Manual
planning

Financial Planning time

Completed within tt) - - -
max. hours

Number of new stow- | 5 26 = = =

age attempts

Crane intensity 1 2 5000 10000 100%
Dead space under 434 350 86800 70000 719%
deck

Containers not 135 i) 16875 iY) -100%
loaded

Restows (containers | 223/393 | 52/233 82575 36925 55%

in Europe/in PKG)

Suez tier Tier9 Tier9

Total 192766 117972

Increased results, one trip eastbound “74794

Increased results 52 trips eastbound / year with 11 vessels 3889275

Lashing errors

Line of sight ok ok
DG conflicts ok ok
Stability GM ok ok
BM ok ok
SF ok ok
™ ok ok
Draft acceptance ok ok
Efficiency Trim target for ok ok
coastal trip
Trim target final port | ok ok
Ballast water ok ok

Table 6.8: KPIs comparison of the manual and automated planning results in the case study [26].

219

===PAGE 220===
220

===PAGE 221===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

CHAPTER 7

Auto-Planning Research

In Chapter 6, a number of software tools for stowage planning have been
introduced and compared. A general observation is that the number of
available tools is limited and that these tools mainly support manual stowage
planning rather than automated approaches.

This does not come as a surprise when considering the level of complexity that
stowage planning entails. The number of combinations in which containers can
be stowed in a container vessel with a capacity of 20000 TEU are astronomi-
cal. For this reason, common rules-of-thumbs often fail and more
sophisticated mathematical optimization methods are needed. This, and the
lack of publicly available data, has made it hard for software vendors to enter
the marked and for researchers to produce viable solution methods.

In recent years, however, closer collaboration between research institutions
and the industry have started a new era of this research. This chapter is
intended for researchers and developers that would like an introduction to the
state-of-the-art. We present our latest stowage planning optimization method
based on more than 10 years of R&D collaboration with a large liner shipping
company. Though the main concepts can be grasped by a wider audience, the
methodological details presented in this chapter require an understanding of
mathematical modelling and optimization algorithms.

7.1 Literature Survey

There are currently about 200 scientific publications on automating stowage
planning using optimization methods. This is a very small number compared to
other scientific fields of transportation. For instance, there are about 200000
publications on the vehicle routing problem [13].

An algorithmic problem can be defined in terms of its input-output relation. To

that end, the container vessel stowage planning problem has been defined as
either a single port or a multi-port optimization problem. The input to the

221

===PAGE 222===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

single port version is vessel data, terminal data, arrival condition, and loadlist.
The output is a stowage plan (i.e., an assignment of containers on the loadlist
to slots on the vessel). The input to the multi-port version also includes
rotation as well as terminal data and expected loadlists in downstream ports.
The output is a stowage plan for each port of which possibly only the first is
used. Below, we categorize the solution methods as either single-phase or
multi-phase approaches.

Single-phase approaches represent the stowage planning problem ina
monolithic optimisation model. Some of the earliest work present a thorough
study of overstowage minimization algorithms for single bays [5]. The
remaining work on single-phase approaches is categorised according to
solution methods. Integer Programming (IP) approaches include a very
accurate but intractable model of the multi-port stowage problem presented
in [11] and simple models with limited scalability (e.g., [3, 28, 37]). Constraint
Programming (CP) approaches include an early simple model of the single port
problem by [2] and the combination of CP [18] and constraint-based local
search (CBLS) [43] used in the approach presented in this chapter. The latter
can generate near-optimal slot plans fast and robustly. A number of
metaheuristics have also been suggested: genetic algorithms [15, 21, 20],
simulated annealing [24], and placement heuristics (e.g., [6]). These
approaches use simple models and often only focus on one aspect such as
overstowage minimization. Additional single-phase approaches include
simulation [48], expert systems [19], 3D-packing [46], and case-based methods
[39]. Also, these approaches lack rich models. More recently a GRASP
algorithm was published which included the handling of DG containers within
slot planning [44].

Multi-phase approaches decompose the problem hierarchically. They are
currently the most successful regarding model accuracy and scalability. The
earliest work can be traced back to a 3-phase heuristic [56], but the first work
that models several major aspects of the problem is a 2-phase approach that
solves a master planning phase for multiple ports with a branch-and-bound
(B&B) algorithm and uses tabu search for slot planning [57]. Other approaches
that use a similar decomposition include solving multi-port master planning
with an iterative improvement approach based on the transportation simplex

222

===PAGE 223===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

method [35] and a bin-packing heuristic [60]. 3-phase approaches include
combinations of constructive heuristics (e.g.[1]), 0/1 IP, and metaheuristics
(e.g., [4]), as well as heuristics combined with local search (LS) (e.g.[58, 23,
38]). Multi-phase approaches developed by the industry include a multi-stage
placement heuristic using a number of lower-bounds [30] and a combination of
sequential LP for master planning and a hierarchy of IPs for slot planning [29].
Both of these approaches solve the multi-port version of the problem. Recent
commercial methods use mixed-initiative approaches, where planner
decisions about the allocation of PODs over the vessel is combined with
automated slot planning (e.g., [17]).

The lack of a public benchmark suite and a common description of the problem
makes it difficult to compare previous work. The approaches presented in the
literature solve different problems and have different assumptions. It is
possible, however, to compare results in terms of level of detail and total
runtime. Table 7.1 provides such a comparison for some of the most successful
work in the field. The first column lists properties of the problem and its
solution approach (such as modeling of overstowage, hatch-overstowage,
multi-port handling, container types, stability, stress moments, crane
utilization, and phase 1 and 2 method), properties of the experimental
instances used (e.g. vessel sizes, the number of different vessel types,
whether the instance is industrial, the number of planned ports, the number of
containers), and properties of the runtime results (the hardware used and the
average CPU runtime per container). The next column shows the state of these
properties for the approach presented in this chapter (which is based on [41,
18, 43]), while the remaining columns show the same for the approaches
presented in [57, 35, 1]. Compared to the method presented in this chapter,
[57] presents what seems to be a detailed model, however, the approach is
time consuming even for the single, very small, instance it is tested on.
Moreover, it is unclear whether the B&B approach used is optimal and how the
feasibility of the problem is handled. The work in [35] presents an
experimental evaluation, but the approach is not tested on industrial
instances. Their approach relies on substantial simplifications such as
approximations of overstowage, and the two phases are heuristically solved. In
[1], we see the first experiments on industrial instances. Also here the authors
apply a number of simplifications. A major difference with the approach

223

===PAGE 224===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

Approach of [57] [35] a]
this chapter

Problem and approach properties

Overstowage + + Approximation -
Hatch-overstowage + + - ?
Multi-port + + Stepwise -

20’ & 40’ containers + + - +
Reefer containers + + - -
High-cube containers - + - -

DG containers - + - 5
Stability + ? + +
Stress forces Shear ? - -
Crane makespan Lower bound Lower bound - -
Method phase 1 MIP (optimal) B&B Heuristic Heuristic
Method phase 2 rived Tabu search | Enumeration ey
Ship size (TEU) 2480-9958 688 2500-4000 2124-5232
Number of ship types 22 1 3 2
Instance type Industrial Industrial Random Industrial &
Number of instances 30 Not reported 180 ee
Number of ports 4-12 4 4-8 2-5
Number of containers 1942-41.345 1008 2375-3800 715-5510
Hardware Queer | Perum | Penuumtt | Colren
Avg. runtime per container 0.016 5.35 0.026 0.049

Table 7.1: Comparison between some of the most successful previous work. Legend of symbols:
included (+), not included (-), unclear from the paper (?).

presented in this chapter is that overstowage within holds is not modelled,
which removes a critical element of the problem. Moreover, stability
constraints are only heuristically handled. The industrial instances are solved
using a heuristic method and are based on only one vessel. Moreover, it is
worth noticing that our approach, using exact methods, can reach runtimes
comparable to those of heuristic solutions. Additionally, our work introduces

224

===PAGE 225===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

the first extensive experimental evaluation based on many different vessel
classes and a large diverse set of industrial instances.

7.2. Solution Approach

From the literature review it is clear that complete mathematical models for
the stowage planning problem are currently not efficient. On the other hand,
many of the constraints in the problem are linear or can be easily linearized.
This observation is the motivation for the decomposition approach described
in this chapter. Most of the combinatorial constraints focus on how containers
can be stacked and not so much on how they influence the stability of the
vessel. We propose a 2-phase approach where the first phase distributes
containers along the vessel, taking into account stability requirements and
quay crane efficiency, while disregarding stacking constraints. The second
phase refines the distribution assigning container types to specific slots
according to the stacking constraints while minimizing e.g. overstowage.
Moreover, we focus on container types rather than specific containers, thus
leaving the terminal some planning flexibility.

Figure 7.1 depicts the 2-phase approach in more detail. The first phase,
multi-port master planning, decides how many containers of each type to
assign to each storage area of the vessel for each port of call. This phase
addresses high-level constraints, and models weight classes of standard 20’,
40’ and RF containers. More precisely, it models GM stability, trim and draft
limits, ROB containers, and shear forces. It optimizes overstowage,
hatch-overstowage, and crane makespan. DG and HC containers are not
modelled. The two former are often stowed in specific areas, while the latter
can be modelled with specialized capacity constraints. Bending moments and

Input Data Multi-Port Master Plans

Gam) ome) NY
c=] Es
Stowage Plan
ca

Figure 7.1: Hierarchical decomposition of our 2-phase stowage planning approach.

225

===PAGE 226===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

ballast water are not included in this model, however, Section 7.4 shows how
these and other real-world characteristics can easily be embedded.

Since our objective is to make a stowage plan for the current port, the master
plan for this port is used as input to the second phase, slot planning. Solutions
for the second phase are restricted to use the amount of the different
container types in each storage area as dictated by the master plan. Here,
container types are assigned to individual slots in the storage areas of the
vessel. In slot planning, all major stacking rules apply: containers must form
stacks, 20’ containers cannot be stowed on top of 40’ containers, RF
containers can only be stowed in RF slots, height and weight stack limits must
be satisfied, and cell capacities must be fulfilled. Containers are assigned
with the aim of minimizing overstowage, clustering containers with the same
POD, and freeing stacks and reefer slots for robustness.

7.2.1 Multi-Port Master Planning

The multi-port master planning phase decides how many containers of each
type to stow into sub-sections of bays called locations (similar to the holds in
[35]). Locations are either above or under a hatch-cover and are used to model
hatch-overstowage. Figure 7.2 shows four locations within a bay. Outer

Aft

Fore

4 Figure 7.2: Locations within
a sample bay.

On deck

Below deck

226

===PAGE 227===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

locations are symmetrically split (such as location 2 and 4 in the figure) to ease
transverse stability calculations [29]. The multi-port master planning problem
is formulated as a mathematical program, inspired by the work presented by
[35]. Before diving into the model, we first present the used notation.

Sets

P Ports {1, 2, ...} in the port call list.

B Adjacent bays.

F Frames, calculation points for stress forces.

L Locations in the vessel.

Li'clh Locations aft of frame fe F.

L°cL On-deck locations.

LiclL Locations below a hatch cover, under location i € L.
LoL Locations in the adjacent bays b € B.

T Container types.

T-8) — T 20’, 40’ and RF container types.

TR Transport tuples (0,d), TR={ (0,d) | 0,d € PU {0}, o<d }.

TR?*c TR Transports with containers onboard at departure from port p e P.
TR} c¢TR_ Transports with containers loading or unloading at port p € P.
TR?" < TR Transports going over port p< P.

Constants

ti TEU coefficient, 1 for r ¢ T**, 2 forr eT”.

Ce. P Objective coefficients for respectively overstowage, location
overstowage, and makespan.

K, Maximum TEU capacity of location / € L.

KR Maximum number of reefer plugs in location / € L.

Apso) Maximum 207/40’ capacity of location / € L.

Ke Maximum cell reefer capacity of location / € L.

LD? Number of containers of type 7 € T to be loaded for

transportt « TR.

LM-/LM* Minimum/maximum longitudinal moment of the ship.

Gt Longitudinal center of gravity measured from midship of
location! € L.

GY Vertical center of gravity measured from keel of location / € L.

227

===PAGE 228===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

M,,(°°"?-") Big-M constants. Set to the upper bound of the respective
constraints.

S/S} Minimum/maximum shear force at frame fe F.

Ri Number of ROB containers of type 7 e T stowed in location! € L of
transport ¢ € TR (all ROB is assumed loaded in port 0).

VM-/VM*+ Minimum/maximum vertical moment of the ship.

WwW, Maximum weight capacity of location / € L.

Wr Average weight of a container of type r « Tof transport t « TR.

Decision variables

ay, € Zt The number of containers of type 7 < T'to be stowed in location
le Loftransportt « TR.

yQeR* The hatch overstowage of location / € L at port p « P(in TEU).

Yn e R* The potential overstowage in location / € L at port p e P(in TEU).

y,eR The lower-bound of the crane makespan at port p e P(in TEU).

6,€ {0, 1} Indicates if containers to load/unload at port p « Pare stowed in
locations below / € L°.

%, € {0, 1} Indicates if ROB or 20’ containers to load/unload at port p « P
are stowed in location / € L.

As in [35], we use a mathematical model for master planning, where we enhance
the given model with the direct inclusion of multi-port modelling. We consider a
set of container types T= {20, 40} x {RF, DC} x {Light, Heavy} which represents,
asides from the most standard container length, a simple weight classification
and the reefer option. For a more precise model, a more fine classification of the
containers can be used with few changes to the formulation. Following is the used

IP model:

minimize
=> (cous +c? yn) +o cTyr (7.1)
pePleL peP

subject to
VW a+ Ri) <i vwePlet (7.2)

teTRON rET

228

===PAGE 229===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

YS YS @h+ RI) < KP ypePleL (7.3)
te TRON reTR
05 D> SO Wit Rn)< KP vpePleL (7.4)
teTRON reTR
YS DY @ht+ Ri) < kK? VwePleL (7.5)
te TRON rET20
SS YS Ch+ RR) < KP WePleL (7.6)
te TRON reTt0
Soe, =LDi vreT,teTR (7.7)
leL
SS Sweat Ri) < Wr Wwe PleL (7.8)
te TRON reT
LM, <> Gr >> SO Wi (i+ Ri) < LM} vpeP (7.9)
'eL  teTRON TeT
VMS <>°GY SD SO Wie + Rh) < VMS YpeP (7.10)
leL  teTRON reT
sss OY VMwent+e<sf vwerser (7.11)
leLASt te TRON TET
YS YM VA + 2h) < MG vp |e Pile L° (7.12)
ieLU teTRA reT
SS Sw (eit 2h) -— M9 (4p) <u% vee Ple L? (7.13)
teTROVTET
SO kat YS 2h) < Mid vee PjleL (7.14)
te TRA rEeT reET20
SY DY We - MP (= op) Suh Ype PEL (7.15)
teTROV reT40
SYS YY MW (Ri+2h) < yp vee Byer (7.16)

te TRA leL, rET

The TEU capacity of each location / is ensured by Constraint (7.2), where
TROX= { (0,d) ¢ TR| o <p < a}. Similarly, the number of RF containers is
limited by the number of available reefer plugs by Constraint (7.3). This is,
however, not enough. Consider a cell with two reefer plugs. Assume now that
two 20’ containers are stowed in this cell and that only one of the two is a

229

===PAGE 230===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

reefer. Constraint (7.3), reduces the reefer capacity only by one, even though
the other reefer plug is no longer available. Constraint (7.4) imposes a cell-wise
capacity on the reefers, thus correctly reducing the reefer capacity of the cell
to zero. It is possible that, within a bay, not all cells can accommodate both 20’
and 40’ containers. Constraints (7.5) and (7.6) force those capacity limits.
Constraint (7.7) force the loading of all containers. Even though it might be
thought as unrealistic to load all the containers in the loadlists, the relaxation
of this constraint would imply a variable displacement and thus a non-linear
model. How this can be overcome is described in Section 7.4. The maximum
weight capacity of location / € L is ensured by Constraint (7.8). Notice the use
of the container group’s average weight (IV ) in this constraint. Even though
container groups are classified by weight, the actual weight value used
depends on transport te TR, which makes it a finer classification without the
need for extra variables. Given a target trim range and metacentric height, the
vessel’s hydrostatic data tables can be used to derive a range of vertical and
longitudinal moment limits with respect to the midship keel that the ship must
not exceed. Those are the limits used in Constraints (7.9) and (7.10). Notice that
transverse stability is satisfied by the symmetrical way outer locations are
specified. The last of the stability constraints is Constraint (7.11), which limits
the shear forces that act on the vessel. It is important to notice that the
presented shear force calculation is based on an approximation of the
buoyancy forces. These forces are calculated for a given displacement when
the vessel is at trim zero. It is then assumed that the variation in trim will not
heavily affect the buoyancy.

Constraints (7.12-7.15) model the overstowage objective [41]. In Constraint (7.12),
the variable 4, is defined, which indicates the presence of loading or
discharging containers in location! ¢ L at port p € P, where

MQ= Sse Deergs (2K; + Lye Rz) and TR} = {(0,d) ¢ TR | p=0V p=d}. These
variables are successively used in Constraints (7.13) to count the hatch-over-
stowing TEU in the variables y°, where M0’ => erpov (Lier, + K,) and

TR" ={ (o,d) € TR| o<p<d }. Constraints (7.14) and (7.15), are used to reduce
the possibility of overstowage within locations. A major cause of forced
overstowage is the placement of 40’ containers. Since it is not possible to
stow 40’ containers below 20’ ones, locations with a high number of 20’
containers that have an earlier discharge port than the 40’ ones, have a higher

230

===PAGE 231===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

chance of resulting in forced overstowage. Constraint (7.14) is used to define
the variables ¢,, which indicate the presence of 20’ containers being loaded, or
discharged, at port p <« Pfrom location / ¢ L. We use a Big-M formulation
where Mri= cre: (Lyer i + 2K). Constraint (7.15) then defines the variable yj,
as the number of 40’ containers that could result in forced overstowage in
location! < L at port p < P, where M?’= K,. A different way to deal with
overstowage is to force each location to only stow containers with the same
port of destination. This, however, limits the solution space and would, in
many of our test instances, result in infeasible problems.

In the minimization of port stay, another important objective is the makespan
of the quay crane operations. Given that any two cranes must work at least
two bays apart, we know that crane moves in adjacent bays can only be
carried out by one crane at the time. Thus, a lower bound of the makespan of
cranes is the maximum work time for a single crane over the set of moves in
adjacent bays. Constraint (7.16) represents this calculation, where the variable
y, defines the lower bound for each port p < P. The index set B represents the
set of adjacent bays as illustrated in Figure 5.12.

We propose a minimization of the weighted sum of the cost variables (7.1),
where the weights have been recommended by a liner shipping company and
thus reflect the economy of stowage planning and the preferences of stowage
planners (C°=30, C’= 0.7, C™=1).

The Complexity of the Multi-Port Master Planning Problem

From a bin-packing reduction, it is easy to show that slot planning is NP-Hard
(e.g. [46]). The same reduction, however, does not apply to the multi-port
master planning problem since it abstracts the slots away. Here we show that
multi-port master planning nevertheless is NP-Hard by a reduction from the
Hatch Overstow Problem (HOP), which has been shown to be NP-Complete
[53]. A HOP instance is a tuple (C, in, out, H, r,m, k), where Cis a set of
containers and c € Cis loaded at port in(c) and discharged at port out(c), His a
set of hatch covers where each h < H must be lifted in the set of ports r(h),
and m is the capacity of each stowage area above a hatch cover. The question
is whether it is possible to stow all the containers with at most k hatch
overstows in the stowage area above the hatches.

231

===PAGE 232===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

Proposition 1. Multi-port master planning is NP-Hard.

Proof. We reduce HOP to multi-port master planning by creating a vessel with
2|H| locations such that for each on deck location there is a corresponding
counterpart below deck. The set C of containers are created as 40’ reefer
containers, where c < C has load port in(c) and discharge port out(c) for c e C.
For each hatch h € H the forced hatch lifts can be modelled by adding |r()|
ROB containers in a location associated with h below deck with discharge
ports equal to those in r(h). In order to disallow stowing other containers below
deck, we make sure that there is no reefer capacity below deck. All locations
will have 40’ capacity equal to m, and we increase height, weight, shear and
stability limits to infinity. Solving the master planning problem will now give us
k’ as the minimum number of hatch overstows which will result in a ”yes”
instance if and only if k’ <k, and ina ”no” instance otherwise. Since the
reduction is polynomial, we have proven that multi-port master planning is
NP-Hard.

7.2.2 Slot Planning

The master plan for the current port is the input to the slot planning phase,
(there is no information flowing in the other direction). The input defines the
number of containers of each type to stow in each location of the vessel, and
by generating a slot plan for each location, a type-based stowage plan is
created. Each slot plan is an independent sub-problem. It must decide which
container type (if any container at all) to stow in each slot of the location. The
container types correspond to those defined in the multi-port master planning
phase and must satisfy the constraints and optimize the objectives mentioned
in Section 7.2 for slot planning. We direct the reader to [18] for a more detailed
presentation of the model.

The slot planning phase is solved using a combination of the CP and CBLS
algorithms described by [18] and [43]. The CP algorithm is initially run with a
time limit of one second.' Optimal or near-optimal solutions are often found
within this time frame. In some cases, however, the CP approach is not able to

1 This corresponds to an upper bound of about 70 seconds for a typical large vessel when
solving all the slot planning sub-problems sequentially.

232

===PAGE 233===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

find solutions. When this happens, the CBLS algorithm is run and the resulting
solution is used. Such situations occur because: 1) the problem is too complex
for CP to solve optimally in one second, and/or 2) the problem is infeasible. The
latter case happens due to the abstraction used in the multi-port master
planning phase. For instance, even when the total weight of containers
assigned to a location is within limits, it may be impossible to stow all
containers in the location due to individual stack weight limits and the
arrangement of ROB containers. Since the loadlist is not strict, and removing a
few containers from the locations has small impact on the stability of the
vessel, the CBLS algorithm has been modified to roll containers that cannot be
stowed.

7.3. Computational Results

We have evaluated the approach described in Section 7.2 ona test bed of 81
instances. An overview of the instances is given in Table 7.2. The first row
represents a categorization based on the size of the vessel. For each size
category, the successive rows present the capacity of the vessel, the range of
locations, the number of instances, and the average percentage of 20’, 40’ and
ROB containers. The instances have been retrieved from the stowage planning
optimization tool described in [29]. It includes: 1) vessel data with ship layout
and stress limits; 2) the assignment of ROB containers; 3) the loadlist (i.e., the
containers to stow) of the current port, which is the port we are making the
stowage plan for; 4) the loadlists of future ports on the route derived from a
forecast based on historical data. The instances are real stowage problems
that stowage planners have solved and thus have very high data quality. Also,
a set of 218 random instances has been created for extended experimentation.

Capacity (TEU) 2000-5000 | 5000-8000 | 8000-10,000 | < Table 7.2: Benchmark data
Locations 40-74 65-90 80-100 properties.

Instances 20 21 40

Avg.% 20° 26 30 19

Avg.% 40’ 40 bh 46

Avg.% release 34 26 35

233

===PAGE 234===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

The classical categorization of instances based on the TEU capacity of the
vessel does not relate well with the size of the problem, especially ina
multiport setting. In Table 7.3 we propose a new categorizations based on the
number of locations in the vessel and the number of visited ports. The second
and third column present, respectively, the number of instances in the
classification group and the range of visited ports.

Size category No. instances Range of ports

Very small 10 3-5 | Table 7.3: Instance size
Small 27 5-8 categorization.
Medium 19 7-10

Large 10 9-12

Very Large 15 10-21

All experiments were run on an AMD Opteron processor at 2.8 Ghz with 128 GB
of memory. Multi-Port master and slot planning models were implemented in
C++ and used the CPLEX 12.5, and Gecode 3.5 ([27]) libraries. Due to the
non-deterministic nature of the CBLS algorithm, results of slot planning are
reported in average over 10 runs of the algorithm.

Despite computing optimal solutions to the master planning problem, the
results shown in Table 7.4 indicate some scalability. The first column
represents the size category of the instances, with the instance count in
parenthesis. The next columns show respectively the number of instances
solved to optimality, solved, solved up to 2% and 5% gap, and solved up to 5%
gap within 600 seconds. The gaps are calculated from the LP bound. Such
results are relevant as they are within the range of inaccuracy of the

Optimal | Opt. (600s) | Solved Sol. 600s. - 5%
Very small (10)
Small (27)
Medium (19)
Large (10)

Very Large (15)
Total 7 5 51 38 45 32

Table 7.4: Results of the IP model. Note: Time limit is set to 3600 seconds.

234

===PAGE 235===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

forecasting data wrt. cargo in the downstream ports. Two results stand out.
First, the model is able to solve to optimality a total of 7 out of 81 instances
within a one hour time limit. Second, within a 5% gap from the LP bound, it is
able to solve 45 instances, 32 of which are solved in less than 10 minutes.
These results show that IP models for master planning can be partially
applied, and thus further effort on improving them may be worthwhile.

MIP Relaxation

The IP results are encouraging, but not strong enough for practical decision
support. This requires a higher rate of success. To this end, we propose to
relax the integrality constraints on the decision variables 7, and thus solve a
mixed-integer programming (MIP) problem.

Table 7.5 presents results for optimal runs and for 2% and 5% gap from the LP
relaxation of the MIP model. It can be seen, in comparison to Table 7.4, that
the number of solved instances has increased. The model is now able to find a
feasible solution for 80 out of the 81 instances, of which 56 are optimal. It is
important to notice that most of the instances that are not solved to
optimality are from the largest instances. Also notice that 71% of the
instances can be solved within a 5% gap from the LP relaxation in less than 10
minutes.

Aclose inspection of the objective components, of the instances solved by
both the IP and the MIP model, shows that only on few of them the objective
components are different. The difference is marginal and it is often a trade-off
between the makespan and the location overstowage objective. This
observation can be used to advocate the use of the MIP model in exchange for

Optimal | Opt. (600s.) Solved Sol. 2% Sol. 5% Sol. 600s. - 5%
Very small (10)
Small (27)
Medium (19)
Large (10)

Very Large (15)

Table 7.5: Results of the MIP model. Note: Time limit is set to 3600 seconds.

235

===PAGE 236===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

the IP model. Essentially, the IP model has to face the combinatorial problem
of deciding whether one single container should be stowed in one location or
another. Using a MIP, we can split this container and avoid the combinatorial
puzzle. Even a single container could, however, cause a large amount of
hatch-overstowage, but we do not see this happening in practice.

These models enable liner shipping companies to use standard solvers and
eases the process of adding side constraints. We also believe that a
MIP-based approach can be used in practice for stowage planning decision
support.

Impact of the Objectives

We now look into how the different objectives impact the runtime of the
instances. Figure 7.3 shows how the average runtime (y-axis) for solving the
model is affected by the different objective components. The figure plots the
average runtime for each class category (x-axis) with the following objective
component combinations: the full objective (OPM), only makespan (M),
makespan and hatch-overstowage (OM), hatch and inter-location overstowage
(OP), only hatch overstowage (0). As expected, when we only optimize for the
makespan, the model is very efficient since it is reduced to a simple LP. What
is very interesting is that we start seeing an increment of runtime when the
makespan is minimized in conjunction to the overstowage objectives. This

10 min. time limit

Very Small Medium Large Very

small 7 large
Instance size

—e— OPM a— M —= OM *— OP —+- 0

Figure 7.3: Impact of the objectives.

236

===PAGE 237===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

confirms our expectations, since the makespan objective guides the search
towards a horizontal layering of the containers’ port of discharge, while the
exact opposite is the aim of the overstowage objectives.

Random Instances

The industrial instances used until now do not cover, for example, the full
range on vessel capacity utilization. In order to test our model on some corner
cases, we have compiled a set of random instances based on the following
parameters. We have chosen two vessels from our set of industrial instances.
Vessel A with a capacity of 2500 TEUs and vessel B with a capacity of 7500
TEUs. For each of the vessels, we have prepared random instances focusing on
vessel capacity utilization and vessel weight utilization. Furthermore, in order
to evaluate the performance of the model according to the distribution of
containers along the ports in the route, we created the random instances such
that they span between 5 and 10 ports. Also, the density of container moves at
each port has been controlled, such that at each port we force between 50 and
100 percent of the target capacity. This means that instances with 100 percent
target capacity and 100 percent container density fully utilize the vessel at
each port. The combination of those parameters gives us a total of 218
instances. The use of the random instances aims at evaluating the model
performance when stress tested. In particular, we want to analyze the model
efficiency under specific vessel capacities and weight utilizations.

We present the results of running the MIP model over the random instances in
Table 7.6. The results are presented for each vessel and are grouped by weight
and capacity utilization. We report the percentage of optimally solved
instances within one hour and within 600 seconds, plus the number of
timeouts. For each group of results, utilization is reported for 50, 70 and 100
percent. In these experiments, the MIP solver is stopped when the 5% LP gap
is reached. The first interesting thing to notice is that the instances that
timeout are of the small vessel. A probable cause for this behaviour could be
the sensitivity of the stability constraints since, in smaller vessels, small
changes in the weight distribution have a larger impact. The random instances,
in general, seem to be easier to solve than the industrial ones. This is probably
caused by the fact that the distribution of weight and destination for the
generated containers is more uniform than in the industrial instances. One

237

===PAGE 238===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

Weight Util Capacity Util

Optimal 100 89 89 100 100 89
Vessel A oon 89 89 83 100 100 78

Timeout 0 " 1 0 0 "

Optimal 100 100 100 100 100 100
VesselB | OPtimal 100 100 100 94 100 100

(600s.)

Timeout tt) te) tt) 0 0 i)

Table 7.6: MIP results over the random instances.

must also consider the fact that it was not possible for us to successfully
generate enough feasible random instances for the class of very large
problems (due to the large set of constraints).

A more detailed look at the results shows some patterns related to the
runtime of the algorithm and the utilization of the ship. Figure 7.4 shows, for
each vessel, the runtime of each instance, for each capacity utilization range.
The results are also grouped by the number of visited ports. As expected, the
runtime of the algorithm increases with the capacity utilization, and we see
this pattern repeating independently from the number of ports in the route.

5 ports 7 ports 10 ports 5 ports 7 ports 10 ports

() 5 10 15 O 5 10 15
Instances of vessel A Instances of vessel B

° 50% 4 70% = 100%

Figure 7.4: Capacity utilization runtime results.

238

===PAGE 239===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

Figure 7.5, however, shows that the same is not true when focusing on the
results over the weight utilization.

5 ports 7 ports 10 ports

fo) 5 10 45 Oo 5 10 15
Instances of vessel A Instances of vessel B

* 50% 4 70% = 100%

Figure 7.5: Weight utilization runtime results.

7.3.1 Slot Planning Experiments

The slot planning experiments presented in this section are generated from
the master planning solution of the current port of the MIP and IP model at 5%
from the LP bound.

MIP generated master plans might have fractional values which need to be
dealt with. Fractions of a container can be assigned to different locations. On
vessels as large as the ones used by liner shippers, the position of a single
container has little, if any, impact on the stability of the vessel. Given sucha
fractioned container, we attempt to place the entire container in a location
where a fraction of it has been assigned. Should we fail to find a suitable
location, the container is dropped. Containers might need to be rolled-out
(dropped) from the IP solution as well. This happens when an odd number of
20’ containers is assigned to a location. Only an even number of 20’ containers
can be secured on board the ship.

Based on previous experiments in [18, 43], we set up a time limit of one second

for slot planning each location. Table 7.7 summarizes the results of our
experiments for the instances which are solvable for both the IP and MIP

239

===PAGE 240===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

Fractional dropped CBLS dropped Runtime
Size class
Very small 4.70 5.10 14.70 16.30 15.77 17.06
Small 6.62 5.62 35.77 43.27 2719 2717
Medium 5.56 4.00 20.56 17.56 23.37 23.46
Large 7.00 5.40 15.80 17.80 26.39 27.45
Very Large 7.00 5.00 16.00 14.00 28.73 23.67

Table 7.7: Slot planning results, grouped by instance size.

models. The columns, from left to right, represent the class size of the
problem, the number for containers dropped due to fractionally or odd value
results, the number of containers dropped by the CBLS algorithm, and the
average runtime for solving all the vessel locations. Values are reported in
average for both the inputs coming from the IP and MIP model.

Vessels are slot planned fast. For the instances with a master plan available,
slot plans are generated within an average of 24.5 seconds in total. There is no
time-wise dominance of slot plans generated from MIP and IP master plans,
indicating that integrality constraints do not affect the complexity of slot
planning. We would expect a reduction in the number of dropped containers
when using the IP solutions. This is, however, not the case, thus one more time
confirming the feasibility of the use of a relaxed model.

Table 7.8 shows the same experimental results grouped by vessel size. This
was done in order to evaluate, whether the algorithm behaves differently
depending on the vessel size. The table shows again no dominance in runtime
or in number of dropped containers due to fractionally and odd number of 20’

containers. Looking at the column listing the containers dropped by the CBLS

Fractional CBLS dropped Runtime Dropped (%)
dropped

Size class

Small 493| 440] 1720] 1973] 14.83] 15.28] 283] 3.39

Medium 6.54} 685] 1231] 2215| 21.47] 22.25] 224) 3.24

Large 6.61 478| 40.83] 41.96] 31.92] 31.76] 3.05] 2.76

Table 7.8: Slot planning results, grouped by vessel size.

240

===PAGE 241===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

algorithm, it would seem that more containers are dropped on larger ships.
This is, however, not the case when we look at the percentage of dropped
containers.

7.4 Extensions for Industrial Application

The stowage planning problem solved in Section 7.2 is a representative version
of the problem suitable for academic work. In order for these models to reach
industrial application, all the details of stowage planning described in the
previous chapters must be addressed. Another limitation is that the model
assumes that the displacement of the vessel is fixed in each port, since the
set of containers to load is assumed to be known and ballast water is ignored.
This simplifies the stability requirements. In this section, we show how to
extend the model to handle variable displacement.

The hydrostatic data tables of a vessel can be used to accurately calculate
stability and stress forces. As an example, consider the trim calculation. Given
the vessel displacement and the longitudinal center of gravity of the vessel, it
is possible to make a look-up in the hydrostatic data for the value of trim.
Figure 7.6a shows a graphical representation of the trim function for a
container vessel.

Notice how, aside from the extreme values of the displacement, trim can be
represented as a linear function of the longitudinal center of gravity fora

04
0.35
_ 03
E 025
& 02
E 0.15
roa
0.05
0

864202 468

Displacement (tonnes) ~ Disp. variation (%)
(a) (b)

Figure 7.6: (a) Graphical representation of the trim hydrostatic data table. (b) Error in trim calculation
as actual displacement diverges from the target one.

241

===PAGE 242===
Chapter7 | Auto-Planning Research

specific displacement. This observation is used in the presented model for
multi-port master planning, where trim limits can be modelled by restricting
the longitudinal moment of the vessel. This approach is only possible,
however, if the displacement of the vessel is constant, which is the case when
we force all containers to be loaded and we do not model ballast water. If we
relax this assumption, the displacement will be variable and thus the model is
no longer valid.

Considering the fact that between changes in ballast water and cargo load, the
total displacement value would hardly change more than 5%, it is possible to
linearize e.g. the trim function with a plane whose two variables will be the
displacement and the longitudinal center of gravity.

Given a target displacement D,"""" for each port p < P, we can collect all the
data points from the hydrostatic data table within a 5% of D,"*". We can
then apply linear regression and approximate a plane representing the trim.

Let the variables u}°¢ and up"? denote the longitudinal center of gravity and
the actual displacement of the vessel at port p € P. The trim at the port (vr"™)
can then be calculated in the following way:

yt = AW ypise 4 At ytoc 4 47 (7.17)
» Tp r’e

where A‘), Aland A’ are the coefficients obtained by the linear regression. In
the same manner, it is possible to calculate other hydrostatic dependent
values such as: draft, metacenter, and buoyancy. Figure 7.6b shows the results
of an experimental evaluation of the accuracy of the linearization. The graph
shows how the error (in meters) of the trim calculation increases as the actual
displacement v?'s* diverges from the original target displacement D"*".
Notice how small the error is (approx. 25cm) within the assumed 5%
displacement range. Should one need a broader range of displacement, it is
possible to combine each 5% displacement range with a piece-wise linear
function without loss of solution efficiency [16]. An extensive discussion of
these linearizations, their inclusion in the model, and experimental analysis
can be found in [42].

242

===PAGE 243===
Chapter8 | Outlook

CHAPTER 8

Outlook

The stowage coordination profession evolves daily with new container types,
ship designs, and terminal operations, as well as new products, alliances, and
vessel sharing agreements.

Stowage planners are valuable employees of the liner shipping companies. At
the operational level, they squeeze the last TEU out of the vessels on a daily
basis, but just as importantly, on a strategic and tactical level, they are vessel
capacity experts with key roles in cargo flow management, uptake
management, and even fleet deployment and network design.

Stowage planning experts are indispensable and will continue to be so for
years to come. Their plans are bets on future cargo that encompass external
decisions of customers and competitors, as well as internal decisions of sales
and cargo flow that are challenging to forecast even with modern computer
technologies such as artificial intelligence (Al) and machine learning (ML).

That said, though, the high complexity of modern stowage planning requires
that we develop powerful decision support systems that can free the planner
from the tedious combinatorial details of slot planning, such that more time
can be spend on the strategic ship management aspects leading to plans with
higher yield.

8.1 The Future of Stowage Planning Software

In Chapter 6, we have documented the impact of using semi-automated
planning systems and described the technology behind these systems. Today,
all major stowage software vendors like Navis (Xvela, StowMan, CapStan, and
Powerstow), Total Soft Bank (CASP), Cyberlogitec (OPUS Stowage), and
Solverminds (VAP) offer auto-planning features.

Acurrent challenge in these products is to find the right division of work
between the stowage planner and the decision support system. The main

243

===PAGE 244===
Chapter8 | Outlook

approach pursued in scientific work as described in Chapter 7 has been to
automate the complete stowage planning process, possibly over multiple
ports. This approach works well given accurate forecasts, but since accurate
forecasts seldom exist as explained in Chapter 4, these methods can not be
applied directly in practice. The latest development in commercial systems is
to factor forecasting out of the automated computations by leaving POD
allocation decisions to the stowage planner. This means that key objectives
like maximizing crane utilization and minimizing stress forces still is taken
care off by the stowage planner. Nevertheless, the tedious and time
consuming slot planning is taken care of by the computer in a fraction of the
time needed to do this manually.

The next natural step is to develop a decision support system that helps the
stowage planner to play around with different future cargo scenarios and pick
a good POD allocation over the vessel. A side bonus of such a system is that it
allows the stowage planner to share future cargo scenarios with uptake
managers and capacity managers and in this way increase the alignment
between these decision processes compared to today.

8.2 Uptake and Capacity Management

A major challenge today in liner shipping is that there is no simple way to
compute the remaining capacity of container vessels.

If uptake managers would know exactly what mix of future cargo to aim for to
maximize the utilization of the vessel, this knowledge could be applied as a
target in the sales process.

Capacity managers face the same problem, but just at a larger scale. Rather
than trying to fit the cargo flow to a single load distribution known to have high
utilization as they primarily do today, they instead should recompute the
residual capacity of the network on a daily basis using accurate capacity
models of the vessels and change routing, pricing, sale, and empty
repositioning towards using this excess capacity. Having such computable
capacity models at hand would change the whole foundation for revenue
management in liner shipping. Automated planning systems apply computable

244

===PAGE 245===
Chapter8 | Outlook

capacity models. If they within the next couple of years are approved by
stowage planning experts, they eventually can be redressed and used in such
uptake and capacity management decision support systems.

245

===PAGE 246===
Chapter8 | Outlook

246

===PAGE 247===
Chapter8 | Outlook

Bibliography

{1] D.Ambrosino, D. Anghinolfi, M. Paolucci, and A. Sciomachen. An
experimental comparison of different heuristics for the master bay plan
problem. In Proceedings of the 9th Int. Symposium on Experimental
Algorithms, pages 314-325, 2010.

[2] D.Ambrosino and A. Sciomachen. A constraint satisfaction approach for
master bay plans. Maritime Engineering and Ports, 36:175-184, 1998.

[3] _D. Ambrosino and A. Sciomachen. Impact of yard organization on the
master bay planning problem. Maritime Economics and Logistics,
(5):285- 300, 2003.

[4] D.Ambrosino, A. Sciomachen, D. Anghinolfi, and M. Paolucci. Anew
three-step heuristic for the master bay plan problem. Maritime
Economics and Logistics, 11(1):98-120, March 2009.

[5] A.H. Aslidis. Optimal container loading. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 1984.

(6] M.Avriel, M. Penn, N. Shpirer, and S. Witteboon. Stowage planning
for container ships to reduce the number of shifts. Annals of Operations
Research, 76:55-71, 1998.

[7] Total Soft Bank. Computer automated stowage planning (CASP).
http: //totalsoft.en.ec21.com/.

(8] T. Bebbington. Stowage coordination. 2014.

{9] D.M. Bernhofen, Z. El-Sahli, and R. Kneller. Estimating the effects of the
container revolution on world trade. CESifo, Center for economic studies
and ifo institute, 2013. CESifo Working Paper Series 4136.

[10] Cargo Book. http://www.cargobook.com.

{11] R.C. Botter and M.A. Brinati. Stowage container planning: A model for
getting an optimal solution. In Proceedings of the 7th Int. Conf. on
Computer Applications in the Automation of Shipyard Operation and Ship
Design, pages 217-229, 1992.

[12] Bromma. Product Information YSX40E, 2017. http://bromma.com/.

[13] CiteSeer. http://www.citeseer.com.

[14] LEK Consulting. London, 2015.

(15) Y. Davidor and M. Avihail. A method for determining a vessel stowage
plan, WO9735266, 1996.

[16] A. Delgado. Models and Algorithms for Container Vessel Stowage
Optimization. PhD thesis, IT University of Copenhagen, 2013.

[17] A. Delgado, R.M. Jensen, and N. Guilbert. A placement heuristic for a
commercial decision support system for container vessel stowage. In
Proceedings of the 38th Conferencia Latinoamericana En Informatica
(CLEI). IEEE, 2012.

247

===PAGE 248===
Chapter8 | Outlook

18] A. Delgado, R.M. Jensen, K. Janstrup, T.H. Rose, and K.H. Andersen. A
constraint programming model for fast optimal stowage of container
vessel bays. European Journal of Operational Research, 220(1):251 - 261,
2012.

19] J. Dillingham and A. N. Perakis. Design of an expert system for container
stowage planning. In Proceedings of the Fleet Management Technology
Conference, Baltimore, 1987.

20] D. Ding and M.C. Chou. Stowage planning for container ships: A heuristic
algorithm to reduce the number of shifts. European Journal of
Operational Research, 246(1):242 — 249, 2015.

21] O. Dubrovsky, G. Levitin, and M. Penn. A genetic algorithm with a
compact solution encoding for the container ship stowage problem.
Journal of Heuristics, 8:585-599, 2002.

22] The Economist. The humble hero, May 2013.

23] L. Fan, H. Low, H.S. Ying, H.W. Jing, Z. Min, and W.C. Aye. Stowage
planning of large containership with tradeoff between crane workload
balance and ship stability. In Proceedings of the International
MultiConference of Engineers and Computer Scientists, volume 2182,
pages 1537-1543, 2010.

24] M. Flor. Heuristic algorithms for solving the container ship stowage
problem. Master’s thesis, Technion, Haifa, Isreal, 1998.

25] International Organization for Standardization. General purpose
containers. http://www.iso.org.

26] R. Gartner, T. Bebbington, A. Nielsen, K. H. Tan, and J. Regner.
Stowmans: Efficient stowage planning for higher cargo intake, a case
study. Technical report, IS Interschalt Maritime Systems, 2015.

27] Gecode Team. Gecode: Generic constraint development environment,
2006. available from http://www.gecode.org.

28] P. Giemsch and A. Jellinghaus. Optimization models for the containership
stowage problem. In Operations research proceedings 2003: selected
papers of the International Conference on Operations Research (OR
2003), pages 347-354. Springer Verlag, 2004.

29] N. Guilbert and B. Paquin. Container vessel stowage planning,
US2010/0145501, Maersk Group, 2010.

30] M. Gumus, P. Kaminsky, E. Tiemroth, and M. Ayik. A multi-stage
decomposition heuristic for the container stowage problem. In
Proceedings of the Manufacturing and Service Operations Management
(MSOM) conference, 2008.

31] W.C. Huang and CY. Chu. A selection model for in-terminal container
handling systems. Journal of Marine Science and Technology, 3:159-170,
2004.

32] Containerization International. Peaks and trougs, 2013.

248

===PAGE 249===
Chapter8 | Outlook

[33] Interschalt. MACS3 loading computer. http://navis.com.
[34] Interschalt. StowMan stowage planning system. http://navis.com.

[35] J.G. Kang and Y.D. Kim. Stowage planning in maritime container
transportation. Journal of the Operations Research Society,
53(4):415-426, 2002.

[36] M. Levinson. The Box. Princeton University Press, 2006.

[37] F. Li, C. Tian, R. Cao, and W. Ding. An integer linear programming for
container stowage problem. volume 5101 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 853-862. Springer, 2008.

[38] F. Liu, M. Low, W. Hsu, S. Huang, M. Zeng, and C. Win. Randomized
algorithm with tabu search for multi-objective optimization of large
containership stowage plans. volume 6971 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 256-272. Springer, 2011.

[39] S.Nugroho. Case-based stowage planning for container ships. In
International Logistics Congress, number December 2004, pages 2-3,
2004.

[40] International Maritime Organization. http://www.imo.org.

[41] D. Pacino, A. Delgado, R.M. Jensen, and T. Bebbington. Fast generation of
near-optimal plans for eco-efficient stowage of large container vessels.
volume 6971 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 286-301.
Springer, 2011.

[42] D Pacino, A. Delgado, R.M. Jensen, and T. Bebbington. An Accurate
Model for Seaworthy Container Vessel Stowage Planning with Ballast
Tanks, pages 17-32. 2012.

[43] D. Pacino and R.M. Jensen. Constraint-based local search for container
stowage slot planning. In Proceedings of the International Multi-
Conference of Engineers and Computer Scientists, pages 1467-1472,
2012.

[44] F. Parreo, D. Pacino, and R. Alvarez-Valdes. A GRASP algorithm for the
container stowage slot planning problem. Transportation Research Part
E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 94:141 — 157, 2016.

[45] Lloyd’s Register. A Master’s Guide to: Container Securing. 2012.

[46] A.Sciomachen and A. Tanfani. The master bay plan problem: a
solution method based on its connection to the three-dimensional bin
packing problem. IMA Journal of Management Mathematics, 14:251-269,
2003.

[47] Seagoline. http://www.seagoline.com/, 2013.

[48] J. J. Shields. Container stowage: A computer aided pre-planning system.
Marine Technology, 21(4):370-383, 1984.

[49] Solverminds. Vessel auto planning (VAP). http://www.solverminds. com/.

249

===PAGE 250===
Chapter8 | Outlook

[50] Polski Rejestr Statkow. Requirements concerning stowage and lashing of
cargos on sea-going ships, 2005.

[51] D.Steenken, S. Voss, and R. Stahlbock. Container terminal operations
research a classification and literature review. OR Spectrum, 26:3-49,
2004.

[52] M. Stopford. Maritime Economics. Routledge, 2009.

[53] K. Tierney, D. Pacino, and R.M. Jensen. On the complexity of container
stowage planning problems. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 169:225 —
230, 2014.

[54] UNCTAD. Review of maritime transport 2016. United nations conference
on trade and development UNCTAD, 2016.

[55] Storck Verlag. Stork Guide: Stowage & segregation to IMDG Code
including Amdt. 35-10. 2010.

[56] W. C. Webster and P. Van Dyke. Container loading. a container allocation
model: | introduction background, Il strategy, conclusions. In
Proceedings of Computer-Aided Ship Design Engineering Summer
Conference. University of Michigan, 1970.

[57] 1.D. Wilson and P.A. Roach. Principles of combinatorial optimization
applied to container-ship stowage planning. Journal of Heuristics,
5:403-418, 1999.

[58] M. Yoke, H. Low, X. Xiao, F. Liu, S.Y. Huang, W.J. Hsu, and Z. Li. An
automated stowage planning system for large containerships. In
Proceedings of the 4th Virtual Int. Conference on Intelligent Production
Machines and Systems, 2009.

[59] M. Zeng, H. Low, W. J. Hsu, S.Y. Huang, F. Liu, and C.A. Win. Automated
stowage planning for large containerships with improved safety and
stability. In Proceedings of the Simulation Conference (WSC) Winter 2010,
pages 1976 -1989, dec. 2010.

[60] W.-Y. Zhang, Y. Lin, and Z.S. Ji. Model and algorithm for container ship
stowage planning based on bin-packing problem. Journal of Marine
Science and Application, 4(3), 2005.

250
